# TODO(connor) v107
v106 Mark D Lippmann Method (“Mastery Protocol”/“Main Protocol”/“Main Protocol Document”/“Protocol
Document”/"meditationstuff protocol"/"MeditationStuff Protocol")



Copyright:

All rights reserved. You may fork/publish lightly transformed (formatted, edited, structurally rearranged) editions of
this work if you prominently link back to this original document, possibly warning that the version they are reading
might be out of date.



***Catch-all/alpha/beta/draft disclaimer:***

I make many bold assertions in this document, and sometimes I use words like usually, often, etc., that may seem to
imply I’m working from a large dataset. Please understand that the protocol has been most heavily tested by me, with a
very small additional number of people who are using the protocol either heavily or at least semi-consistently. More and
more people are trying this thing out as it becomes more widely known. But, we don’t have a lot of data, and, when I
make bold claims, I’m extrapolating from everything I know, which will at minimum be many, many things adjacent to the
protocol but not necessarily derived from empirical use of the protocol by other people, and in a very small number of
cases, even myself. But, for what it’s worth, I eat my own dog food as it were. The protocol has been my sole
transformative practice for thousands of hours, and I’ve tried extensively to suss out all former prerequisites and to
incorporate them into the practice. And I’m tracking some of the users very carefully. I currently believe other people
besides myself can use this thing to take themselves all the way.



Funding:

Please support this open access work: https://www.patreon.com/meditationstuff [As of this version, now at 8 patrons and
$101/month USD. Next round number $110; 9$ to go; 92% complete.]



Author web presence: https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com



Canonical location of this document: https://github.com/meditationstuff/protocol_1



Alternative versions:

Sometimes individuals publish lightly transformed versions of this document to facilitate engagement with the material
while it is still in draft form. These versions may be out of date:

(*) https://rothos.github.io/protocol_1/



Contents (simplified/elided): front matter and more (including a full table of contents) goal end state other practices
	culture and community evil creativity the creativity of evil joy practice preliminaries and vacations;
	conceptualization as such risks environment movement posture breath states “headyness”/“heady-ness”/“headiness”
	body, self-trust, sensory processing, meaning meta practice meta protocol meta meta protocol [sic] solo practice
	(“main protocol”) preliminary/auxiliary practices main practice(s) creativity(/unsticking) protocol interpersonal
	practice many protocol alternative formulations lists and more back matter and more



preamble [draft!]:

1. Remember, you’re probably going to die. Remember that the universe may experience heat death. Remember that, in some
   sense, death and heat death are in some sense just ideas and concepts.
2. Remember that, while no one is obligated to give you or help you get these things, you deserve happiness, health,
   enjoyment, love, sex, family, and more.
3. Remember, in the relevant sense, you are the sole and final arbiter of what’s true, good, and beautiful. Feel what
   you feel. Do what you do. And, again, I think Crowley got something right, here, in the relevant sense (and possibly
   other things, too; i just haven’t investigated): Do what thou wilt, that is the whole of the law. Love under will.
   (or something)
4. […]
5. […]
6. If you are at risk from sequelae of high blood pressure, intracranial pressure, or intraocular pressure (e.g. stroke,
   dissection, glaucoma), then you must not engage with the practices below or you must engage with them with extreme
   caution. If you have spinal or cervical abnormalities that could lead to spinal cord or nerve root impingement, then
   you must not engage with the practices below or you must engage with them with extrem caution. If you have other
   musculoskeletal risks then you must be careful.
7. Individuals residing in households with other residents below the age of eighteen or over the age of 65 should not
   engage in these practices after practice has been initiated, unless there is no one under the age of eighteen in the
   household and anyone over the age of 65 has consented to your doing these practices in residence after they’ve read
   this numbered list.
8. Women who are pregnant or you might become pregnant before asymptoting in these practices (e.g. 2-10 years,
   depending) should not engage in these practices.
9. If you are at risk for suicide, psychosis, or mania then you should engage with these practices with extreme caution.
10. If you have metabolic or cardiovascular disease such that a prolonged, inadvertent sedentary lifestyle (no exercise
    because of musculoskeletal sequelae) would be dangerous, then you should engage with these practices with caution.
11. If your immune system is under- or overactive, then you should engage with these practices with caution.
12. If you have experience abuse, psychological trauma, physical trauma, etc., then you should engage with these
    practices with caution.
13. If you engage with these practices then you must be aware that you could permanently ruin the rest of your life or
    die (sooner that you would otherwise). You must also be aware that the lives of people around you may be ruined or
    those people may die sooner as a result of your engaging these practices.
14. […]



an exoteric doctrine: (v0.2)

[Note, immediately below, it might seems like "nebulosity" or "emptiness" isn't acknowledged, but note that this is a
first-pass, orienting *exoteric* doctrine. In the document as a whole, I often use the term "inappropriate reification"
or "provisionality" where "nebulosity" or "emptiness" could mostly be used in place of this phrase.]

Objective and singular truth exists (and/or objective reality exists and objective truth corresponds to it).

Objective and singular goodness(/ethics/morality) exists.

The human mind is typically confused, uncertain, and ignorant. (Or, a typical person is…)

Nevertheless, we can know typically error-prone approximations of that objective truth and we can know/do approximations
of that objective goodness.

Further, the human mind is asymptotically perfectible. That is, we can become better people in a practically unlimited
way, all things being equal.

???There are more worse ways than better ways to interact with oneself and others.

In any moment you are the final arbiter of what’s true and good. You have to trust yourself while also being open to
being wrong. This is hard but can get easier.

It’s possible to do more harm than good when trying or intending to do good and become better. (Also, you are the final
arbiter of what’s better.)

Using systematic (albeit self-adapted) method is often or at least sometimes a good way to improve one’s approximations
of truth and goodness. Stated alternatively, we can systematically seek to get the things we want and we can
systematically come have better wants (want better things).

Some methods are better than others, depending on what you’re trying to do, such as knowing and doing better.

We want what we want until we want something else, and it’s ok or good to want what we want for as long as we want it.

Perhaps evil or malevolence is objective but things are only bad relative to your skill, power, and knowledge.
Perfectibility (asymptotically) includes solving all your problems on your terms, in your words, until there is nothing
left that is bad.

You might not feel good and safe all the time, but it’s good to want to feel good and safe, and it’s good to seek to
stably feel good and safe or to feel good and safe as much as possible.

Without exception, and no matter how subtle the feeling, there’s always a valid sense in which, if it feels wrong it is
wrong. [i.e. if X makes you feel wrong, then X is somehow wrong.] People often will systematically and relentlessly deny
the relevant sense in order to try to immorally coerce and control you. Senses other than the relevant sense can be used
to Inappropriately destroy institutions. People trying to control you will try to convince you the former is the latter
(among an unlimited number of other tactics that don’t refer to groups or institutions.) Of course, you could be
mistaken about something or both could be happening. But that’s what the controlling people will do.

You might get hit by a bus or meteor or your cryo chamber might run out of geopolitics or something. But, it’s possible
to have a good life, anyway, and it’s possible to impeccably work to reduce the chances of such bad things while having
a good, complete, rich, full, life.

Most people will probably be happier striving for and maintaining a stable romantic pair-bond and having one or more
kids.

Love properly labeled and defined is probably a uniquely important thing.

Some truths are exceptionless/universal and eternal or sempiternal or timeless or outside-of-time or something. With
correct method, you can know those truths by making use of whatever experiences you’ve already had (because those truths
will massively redundantly inhere in those experiences without exception.) Some truths and knowledge of
correct/good/moral knowledge/behavior are contingent (or relative to, or contextually dependent on, this world and time
and place) and, to obtain them, you’ll need to dispel ignorance, to have experiences, to learn. You’ll be wrong and bad
a lot. Also, you are good.

Progress is often multidimensionally nonmonotonic.

These are just words. This is just your interpretation of these words. Are there even words? You can’t know anything for
sure; and that can be ok, with application of method or just because. There are more precise and accurate and deeper and
more correct ways ways to say all the above. More and more and more of everyone may come together to do good things that
we couldn’t do alone. Sometimes, an edgy joke should go here. Let go…



past versions:

the current thing - phenomenology all plus blending * see also meditation slides folder.rtf
devolition--so-called-v2--global unconditional refactoring at finest grain modulo good bad analysis.rtf good bad
analysis ultimately ontology plan refactoring;--dynamics reformulation and goodness analysis.rtf v4.rtf v5-v9.rtf
practice notes dialogue * snapshot 20190117.pdf 20190103_*_questions_on_background.txt v10 snapshot 20190117 with
index.rtf v11 snapshot 20190119 with index.rtf v11 the source 20190123.rtf v12 20190123.rtf v13 20190124.rtf v14 true
safety-handledness with index with v15 addenda.rtf v15.2 20190127.ooutline v16xx.ooutline including representational
stuff.ooutline v17.ooutline v18 pieces, v19 pre with index.rtf v19.2 * Method.rtf v20 backup 20190202.rtf v21 20190202
backup.rtf v21 backup 20190204.rtf v22 backup 20190205.rtf v23 backup 20190208.rtf v24 backup 20190208.rtf v24 backup
20190211.rtf v25 backup 20190211.rtf v25 backup 20190215.rtf v26 backup 20190216.rtf v27 backup 20190216.rtf v27 backup
20190216b.rtf v27 backup 20190217.rtf v27 backup 20190218.rtf v27 backup 20190218b.rtf v28 backup 20190218.rtf v28
backup 20190220.rtf v28 backup 20190221.rtf v28 backup 20190222.rtf v28 backup 20190224.rtf v28 backup 20190303.rtf v29
backup 20190306.rtf v30-pre backup 20190306.rtf v30-pre backup 20190307.rtf v30-pre backup 20190310.rtf v31-pre backup
20190324.rtf v29 backup 20190324.rtf v31-pre backup 20190325.rtf v32 20190410 backup.rtf v33 backup 20190410.rtf v34
backup 20190410.rtf v35 backup 20190410.rtf v36 backup 20190411.rtf v37 backup 20190411.rtf v38 20190411 backup.rtf v39
20190412 backup.rtf v40 20190412 backup.rtf v40 20190422 backup.rtf v41 backup 20190423.rtf v42 backup 20190428.rtf v42
backup 20190428b.rtf v43 backup 20190428.rtf v43 20190429 backup.rtf v44 backup 20190506.rtf v45 20190512 backup.rtf v46
20190513 backup.rtf v47 backup 20190521.rtf v48 backup 20190622.rtf v49 backup 20190622.rtf v50 20190704 backup.rtf v51
20190706 backup.rtf v52 20190707 backup.rtf v53 20190709 backup.rtf v54 20190709 backup.rtf v55 backup 20190715.rtf v56
20190720 backup.rtf v57 20190727 backup.rtf v58 20190919 backup.rtf v59 backup 20190919.rtf v60 20191016 backup.rtf v61
backup 20191021.rtf v62 backup 20191103.rtf v63 backup 20191104.rtf v64 20191104 backup.rtf v65 backup 20191110.rtf v66
20191110 backup.rtf v67 20191110 backup.rtf v68 backup 20191118.rtf v69 20191118 backup.rtf v70 backup 20191118.rtf v71
backup 20191118.rtf v72 backup 20191118.rtf v73 backup 20191122.rtf v74 backup 20191122.rtf v75 backup 20191122.rtf v77
backup 20191205.rtf v78 20191205 backup.rtf v79 backup 20191205.rtf v80 backup 20191207.rtf v81 20200128 backup.rtf v82
backup 20200225.rtf v83 20200405 backup.rtf v84 backupd 20200408.rtf v85 20200426 backup.rtf v86 backup 20200426.rtf v87
backup 20200426.rtf v88 20200503 backup.rtf v89 backup 20200515.rtf v90 backup 20200629.rtf v91 backup 20200704.rtf v92
backup 20200719.rtf v93 backup 20200719.rtf v94 backup 20200719.rtf v95 20200720 backup.rtf v96 20200819 backup.rtf v98
20200824 8f536062759c618b129d8e1f610f21c217d78042.txt v98 20200824 06310c2766f3d007905758fe4d8ada92b0b60367.txt v99
20200824 e3aac9ab2cb9370f8ac96cb7dd4d5b3b6de3a206.rtf v100 20200831 8db595caf6e7b16c466cd1b8f5c0a9be53f7e803.zip
20200831 7e970c91957b00aef1be97ea5dfc14a5ab3f975f.zip v102 20200905 50c7c33faffd05939eb1f5858e471902618f315a.zip v103
20200906 43f6d83b05857cef1aa6912c7c7b0f232c5f4acd.zip v104 20200907 af027327a873b98cf6bb9215828e04d4de79faf4.zip v105
20201015 08b3bca342190d3a91b1960cd05c018b5491de29.zip



Credits:

…JD, __, __, __, __, __, __, H, A… [I have to ask several of these people whether they want to be explicltly credited.]



Contents (expanded):

version and working title copyright catch-all/alpha/beta/draft disclaimer funding author web presence canonical location
of this document alternative versions contents (simplified/elided) preamble an exoteric doctrine v0.2 past versions
credits contents (expanded) introduction; getting over the hump; text interpretation goal end state no fixed
conceptualized goal or end state part one ("goodness") no fixed conceptualized goal or end state part two ("better")
meditation is concrete problem solving wellbeing and sacrifice ok-ness and cosmology seamless hyphenation [draft] other
practices culture and community evil part X: introduction part X: a brief layer model of mind, personality, groups, and
(global) culture part X: the blooming, buzzing confusion part X: the demon-haunted world and science as a candle in the
dark (as per Carl Sagan) part X: everyday blah, hapless creeps, dark wizards, and cult leaders part X: spot the dark
wizard part X: healers part X: witch hunts, vulnerability, contagion, tragedy of transformation, community
decompensation part X: timelines and stopgaps and sanity checks part X: the late-stage meditator in community part X:
cult leaders part X: spotting a cult leader by overt signs part X: incomplete list of relatively succinct
concepts/definitions part X: teachers and leader timelines part X: layer theory and high-level principles of ethical,
nonharmful, noncoercive, safe interaction part X: it’s not cool part X: the quiet interaction and beauty of subtle
interpersonal effects part X: depth of horror part X: inappropriate reification creativity the creativity of evil joy
lineages and transformative works practice preliminaries timeline, mindset, trajectory, harm raw hours better to finish,
and smoothly a failure mode meditation is not strength-training entrenchment and active occlusion (layering) extreme
skill and extreme standards physical sequelae the end of your world: (after adyashanti, maybe?) drama error propagation,
wayfinding, grace of what minds are conclusion practice preliminaries and vacations; conceptualization as such risks
transitioning from other practices (re "sharp cutovers") environment [and subtlety; (more) risks and rabbit holes]
movement posture breath states “headyness”/“heady-ness”/“headiness” body, self-trust, sensory processing, meaning but is
it meditation? (a dialogue between J and Mark) practice in daily life or no? what about concrete/proximal problems? meta
practice meta protocol collaborator formulations collaborator formulation 1 meta meta protocol solo practice (“main
protocol”) preliminary/auxiliary practices main practice(s) introduction practices p0 p1 [old names: Elemental Analysis,
Comprehensive Elemental Analysis] p2 p3 p4 p5 p6 p7 p8 p9 p10 [experimental] theory incomplete, alternative renderings
creativity(/unsticking) protocol what to do when nothing's happening/working creativity(/unsticking) protocol
interpersonal practice formulation 1 (including Many Protocol) formulation 2 formulation 3 formulation 4 formulation 5
formulation 6 lists and more nonmonotonicity definitions undefined and explications bodymindenvironment can’t-look-yet
(“avoidance”) systematicity exhaustivity and bottlenecks (mental) action and the attentional manifold the use of the
will using your time a note on force (plus a brief mention of “redo-to-undo”) meditating by coincidence failure and
other seemingly permanent and bad things how bad does it have to get? extremity replay and creativity: panic, trauma,
sexual arousal on falling asleep a gentle onramp good(ness) bad(ness) some “big” useful concepts poem of self/other
confusion and interdependence states invitation of acceptance nutrition historical and contemporary difficulties and
uncertainties of life [experimental section] muscle tension scratch last gasps being (not) ok tangles dark phenomenology
and presence/absence conceptions getting triggered, usefulness and risks a dialogue between N and Mark, on reasoning and
pre-reasoning “psychic” and “supernatural” stuff: what/how/how-not [draft] self and other; good and bad [draft] prenatal
experiences direct and indirect people and group stuff teaching and learning and creating and relating (meditation and
anything) teaching no one gets pixel-perfect possibilities guided on-ramp for main practice p2 [draft] learning
technical debt, meditation, and minds a speculative comment on language learning technical debt and inverse operations
merely just having the experience itself, and, technical debt is good, actually meditation indirectly discloses domain
knowledge relating in-relationship foreclosing legacy of past interaction [stub] creating randomness/arbitrariness,
unpunished, as necessary data [not yet written] bibliography (incomplete)



introduction; getting over the hump; text interpretation:

There’s an ongoing project of collecting all the reasons why people bounce off of the document, plus corresponding
supplementary information:

1. The document does require text interpretation. Even if it was written in clean, grammatical prose, it would still
   need to be incrementally parsed and interpreted. It does need to be studied. Lengthy explanations would lose the
   “cutting at the joints,” in the document, where every word is included for a reason. Eventually, I do want there to
   be a softer entry. But that might be separate from the document itself. This does mean there are “startup costs” and
   initial cognitive overhead.

2. The main practices do need to be learned incrementally. It’s not possible to just pick them up and start doing them.
   Even after one can “hold an entire practice in their head,” the doing of it will still evolve substantially over
   time. So, there is additional cognitive overhead and a learning curve or even learning cliff, here, too.

3. The main practices might initially seem not like meditation. But, they do asymptote at something that superficially
   looks like noting practice and shamatha without support. But, this is approached in a bottom up way, as opposed to a
   top-down way. (As a longer discussion, I currently think canonical concentration practices as well as things like
   metta being used as a concentration practice, are ultimately counterproductive, because their top-down nature sends a
   person off sharply on a direction that hasn’t been properly error-checked. And, I currently believe a person will
   have to do a lot of backtracking, given my understanding and experience of how the mind works.)

4. Some of the auxilliary/preliminary practices might seem suspiciously non-meditationy, like cognitive behavioral
   therapy or something. One of my goals was to combine the best of “western depth psychology” with the best of
   meditation. Lots of meditation practioners and teachers do have crushed or unresolved trauma and behavioral issues.
   The so-called “purifications” do a bunch of the work of western psychology, but they don’t go all the way, hence the
   somatic issues, sex scandals, and behavioral blindspots of lots of meditators. One can think of this practice as
   supercharging the purifications, making them much more comprehensive and thorough. At the same time, the practices do
   produce an experience of emptiness, and, asymptotically, nonduality. These practices go all the way to the very end,
   and then some. There is further discussion of this in this later section:

"but is it meditation? (a dialogue between J and Mark)"

5. My current best estimate is that these practices, even taking into account learning time, achieve various “classical
   milestones” about an order of magnitude faster than traditional practices. I’m still working this out. And, I expect
   speed gains and payoffs continue to accrue cumulatively and compoundingly. We shall see. In any case, this does
   continue to be an investment of thousands of hours. And, some payoffs come late in the game, while some payoffs to
   occur steadily. And there are still risks to be worked out and improved upon.

*

A, a collaborator, says:

>>>
My 30 second version for a[n...] introduction is:

This document contains meditation instructions, and some things you may want to be aware of before starting or in the
middle of a meditative journey.

Some instructions and signposts are (probably) necessary, as figuring it all out on ones own is a tall order. Still,
there is a sense in which you will have to “figure it all out on your own,” anyway, instructions notwithstanding.
Receiving any instructions causes problems, as people try to “do the instructions” instead of “do the thing.” This
document contains one stab at a “minimum effective instruction set” — use as though “some assembly is required” where
“some” means “this document and your interpretation are two ends of the most difficult game of telephone yet devised,
and there’s no way it was written correctly or interpreted correctly on the first n tries.”

It starts by exploring in what way talking about “the end of the path” is coherent (or not). Then there are some notes
on culture and other topics, and then the instructions and additional information are included after that.

Do the thing, and good luck.

[...]

this document and [the reader's] interpretation are two ends of the most difficult telephone game devised, and there’s
no way it was written correctly or interpreted correctly on the first n tries

[...]


Might replace "do the thing" with "handle all your concerns, bottom up" or [something like that]. <<<

("Telephone" or "the telephone game" or "Chinese whispers" is game where players whisper a message, from person to the
next, until the last person finally says the final received message out loud, and the first person reports the original
message. There is almost always a nearly inevitable (and humorous) difference between the first and last message, due to
all sorts of possible reasons for successive transmission error.)

*

I'll finally add that this document aspires to be more and more radically complete, over time. It's already quite
comprehensive, along *maybe* all necessary dimensions, but more and more detail and clarity (including cleaner prose and
smoother on-ramps) could be added, for a long time. Having an extremely experienced teacher readily available will maybe
always be a massive accelerant, but my ideal would be to completely obviate the need for a teacher--I'd like future
people to be able to completely reconstruct the practice, and succeed at it, even one thousand years from now (2020),
even if the living, person-to-person lineage gets broken, i.e. if everyone using this document dies. That would be sad
and likely people would change a lot over one thousand years (cf. biotech and neurotech), but it's likely this material
would still be valuable, indirectly or quite directly, just as it is, right now.


goal: (draft)

The goal of the practice is to have a good life, in the most broad and ordinary sense, on your terms, in your words, in
your frame, or in no frame. That might look still, quiet, and intimate. That might look big and beautiful. (That might
or might not include a good death.) That might look superficially normative and be quite nonnormative under the hood and
in the cracks. Or that might quite normative in lots of ways. But the important thing is that it is good for and
everyone you care about (which might be no one, everyone, etc.). It might end too soon or go on too long or who knows.
In some sense you might fail: Maybe you or people you care about will get hit by a bus, a heart attack, a meteor, or a
nuclear war. But the goal is to have a good (peaceful, interesting, exciting, fun, intimate, quiet, safe, stable,
normal, extraordinary) life. That’s the point of all of this. (Asymptotically, nonmonotonically approaching
self-perfection might be an interesting, fun, mediately traumatizing, opportunity-costly, incidental side effect.)

Part of having a good life is preparing and account for (the likely possibility of) death such that you actually have a
good life. One can have a dispreference for death, while not fearing it, while competently and proactively avoiding it,
while seamlessly having that be a part of everything else that is good.

One might have to give up everything in the pursuit of this goal, strangely, weirdly, even as lots of things stay
superficially the same. In some ways getting everything you want will first cost you everything, will cost you your
entire world, as you realize what you want is nothing like what you initially thought, that reality is nothing like what
you initially thought, even though what you want appears superficially similar, in some ways, to what you previously
wanted.

You get the good stuff back eventually, though.

“Better not to start. If you start, better to finish.”

“Before enlightenment, chop wood, carry water. After enlightenment, chop wood, carry water.”

“Before practice, the mountains were just mountains. During practice, the mountains were no longer mountains.
Eventually, the mountains were just mountains again.”

Your perception, behavior, ontology, judgments, and preferences get refactored, with lots of mistakes made along the
way. Thousands of hours. Lots of opportunity cost. Also lots of opportunity gain. All things being equal, with enough
starting resources (financial, relationships) and grace.



end state: (draft!)

The end state is arrived at asymptotically. There’s always room for improvement because the world keeps changing. The
journey will often be nonmonotonic, too.

In any case, what it sort of looks like is coming to be intrinsically motivated to optimize self and world, seamlessly,
without limit or exception, to care for everything into the infinite future, including yourself, all together, all at
once. (This comes with something like “getting lost in the intrinsically interesting whole-person intricacies of other
people.”)

Being this way, all the way down to the core of your being, sort of cleanly solves all your problems in the moment and
in the limit. [“Infinity” is just a concept, etc., etc. Don’t take refuge in your interpretation of these words. Let it
all go.]

Another way to express this is “true (global) total (maximum) positive sum with no negative externalities.”

Another way to express this is “embodying a perfectly unified, eternal, sempiternal, and exceptionless will that’s going
after the most good and best thing for everybody and everything, including yourself, without compromise or exception,
all at once.

One comes to see that there are no terrible, hard truths and no terrible, hard tradeoffs.

One comes to know deeply that, if something feels or seems wrong, no matter how subtle, still, small, and quiet, then
something is wrong, somewhere, and it doesn’t have to be.

You have to feel and listen, eventually, ultimately, to each, every, and all still, small, and quiet voice:

“If you’re good to them, then they’ll become good you.”

All of the above is not “turiya” or “nonduality,” but it is compatible with that “stateless state.”

Progressive insight into emptiness unlocks the capacity for turiya and the capacity for all the above. And progress
towards turiya is usually progress towards all the above, and vice versa. Using the practices in this document will
steadily, albeit nonmonotonically, move you towards all of this. You’ll incidentally get all the meditation-y goodness,
too, without having to do anything special.

You will get all the meditation-y goodness, in addition to everything else (which I suspect was the goal of many
non-modern-Buddhist systems).

You’ll be aiming at and asymptotically, nonmonotonically arriving at “mastery”/“perfection”/“flawlessness”.

There’s a final, additional piece which completes of all of this, that’s something like “proactive recursive
bootstrapping,” progressively structuring self and world to learn about self and world more and more efficiently and
effectively.

Again, working with the practices in this document are intended to efficiently take you towards everything above.

A failure mode is trying to smash yourself into being what you think all the above must be like, by trying to directly
aim at preconceived notions. If you don’t do all this “bottom up,” then you’ll tie yourself in knots.

The better thing to do is to *go after what you want,* systematically and iteratively resolving or correcting internal
conflict and contradiction and error (with respect to goodness, truth, will, desire, etc., etc., etc.) along the way,
and you’ll likely eventually find yourself in the neighborhood of something like what’s described, here. It will
eventually be unified and elegant and a simplicity on the far side of complexity and not overwhelming or scattering or
impossible. That’s what solving the puzzle box of the mind does. And it will be fun, meaningful, interesting,
equanimous, captivating, loving, intimate, exciting, erotic, whatever.

Remember, in the relevant sense, you are the sole and final arbiter of what’s true, good, and beautiful. Feel what you
feel. Do what you do. And, again, I think Crowley got something right, here, in the relevant sense (and possibly other
things, too; i just haven’t investigated):

Do what thou wilt, that is the whole of the law. Love under will. (or something)

A key insight: If you know you’re doing the absolute best you can at all times in each moment taking into account all
future times and all possible futures deep down in your bones then you just relax and let go, and it feels good

Related: You can stop checking, compensating, reminding, self-correcting, etc., if you know both that you’re up to date
and also that you’ll responsively and seamlessly update in the presence of new information.

The “good for everyone all at once thing” is equivalent to solving all of your problems.

[For everything above, don’t take refuge in your interpretation of these words, or, if you do, hold it lightly. Let it
all go. Let it all go to get the real thing back, later, in the right way, beyond your current conception. This is all
just words. The whole document is just words. You must find your own truth or lack thereof, meaning or meaninglessness.]

Said one more time, the goal and the end-state (cf. wisdom, mastery, compassion, love, altruism):

The goal is to arrange self, life, and the entire world so that the guiltless seeking of joy (fun, excitement, interest,
intimacy) and the expression/exemplification of love/compassion is safe, good, constructive and unconflicting.

And then you arrive at intrinsically wholehearted, heartfelt, affinity-feeling, pleasurable and rewarding and satisfying
[and non-naive, competent, strategic and error-correcting] altruism/compassion/love [that truly expects no personal gain
in return and only hopes for something truly good and experientially good for the other person] that’s romantic,
paternal, maternal, egalitarian, platonic, and globally inclusive, that nevertheless delivers equal or greater personal
safety/fulfillment/everything than selfish[ly-oriented] planning/intention/behavior. [You may find that there’s nothing
that you can securely or permanently or stably hold onto for yourself, anyway, that there even is anything to hold onto,
anyway.]

There is no end-state, though. Eventually you perhaps become the practice and it just goes by itself, in activity and
rest/alone-time, but then you keep going, improving, learning, learning how to learn, proactively learning, proactively
living, living your life, etc.


no fixed conceptualized goal or end state part one ("goodness"):

[Originally published as: "Post-conceptual meta-goodness and changing in the deepest of ways"]

[last accessed: 20200824
https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2019/03/28/post-conceptual-meta-goodness-and-changing-in-the-deepest-of-ways/]

So, what’s good? Like really actually good, not clunky blocky stilted cringy good?

Or we could say, what do you desire that you endorse desiring?

Or we could say, what are you always already in motion trying to get, whether you realize or it not, whether you’re
reflectively thinking about it or not?

There will be maybe lots of things, probably one or more things is in the intimacy or connection space, partially
involving in-real-life interaction or perhaps partially involving, say, creative expression. And then there will
probably be things involving safety and achievement, including stuff that involves feelings of exhilaration or
excitement or deep satisfaction or meaning.

Importantly, there will be ways in which all of this is deeply personal and idiosyncratic. For you, it’s not just some
abstract “intimacy” that is good or feels good, but your highly personal, highly specific version, what you might even
call “the real thing.” And the same goes for everything else you’re trying to do, be, have, achieve, etc.

That is, some or even much of what’s happening around us or will happen to us, we have no preference about, but for some
things, we have exquisitely precise preferences, perhaps especially for care and safety, mutual understanding, and
sexuality.

Sometimes we want really, really specific things, and there is no substitute.

Perhaps the whole point of everything is that we create a world where everyone can pursue their personal desires and
goals.

It’s all fun and games when people’s desires and goals are complementary and compatible.

And/but there’s another way of looking at desires, goals, and goodness.

Sometimes desires and goals can be both problematic and fixed.

For example, you want a really, really, really, really specific intimacy thing or sex thing or achievement thing, and
sometimes other things are so good or more important that you can set that thing aside, but some things, for whatever
reason, are so important that you can’t.

You can’t set it aside, even though, for example, you’re having trouble finding someone complementary to do it with or
arranging your life to be able to do it.

I think for some people, the reason their relationships keep failing or life situations keep failing is because of
extreme specificity in wants/needs/desires that are ill-suited to present, contingent circumstances. (There are of
course many other reasons.)

So, when faced with extreme specificity, one might strive even more mightily to find the right person or to arrange
their life in a particular way. Tremendous collateral and direct good can come from this and also agony. One might also
finally resign on getting a particular thing. There can be peace and dignity in this and also agony.

With tools like meditation, there is an additional option which is to change ones deepest wants/needs/preferences. Some
preferences can be changed with relatively superficial introspection or exposure to new environments or people. Other
preferences can “go all the way to the bottom” and seem immovable, even if they cause tremendous distress. And these
sorts of things can be a reason to invest in hundreds or even thousands of hours or meditation, even with its risk and
opportunity cost.

If you decide to meditate to change deep things about yourself, that can take months or years, and patience and
forebearance are assets here.

But, I’m definitely not saying “crush your desires.” Nor am I saying indiscriminately indulge them, though I’m way more
on that side. Your desires are your desires until and unless they’re not.

Desire and perceived goodness aren’t arbitrary even if there’s tremendous idiosyncratic contingency in them and nor do
they change arbitrarily.

Whatever desires you’ve got, whatever is good as far as you experience and can tell, it’s desirous and good until and
unless it isn’t.

So let’s say you’re not crushing or smashing yourself, and little by little things start to change, even while some
things are the same as they ever were. And eventually something deeper starts to change, but you can’t even let yourself
imagine that this even deeper and more problematic thing will change. And then that finally does too…

So at first one is sort of trying to solve problems and achieve goals (and ignore them and resign on them).

And then with meditation (and therapy and journaling) one realizes that, at least sometimes, and then more and more, it
can be possible to not just solve problems but also “dissolve” many problems and not just achieve goals but also to
replace goals with better goals.

So there’s this meta-dimension that starts to come into focus. This perhaps whole new degree of freedom with which to
relate to self and world.

And, eventually, as you get more and more of a taste of this moving through the contigency of desire/problem/goal space,
you might start to ask what is even good anyway?

So much of what you thought was good, that felt immovably intrinsically desirable or good, turned out to be more
contingent and more movable than you thought. (Again, you never have to give anything up in any deep way until it’s
safe, natural, and effortless to do so. And until then it’s yours and if it’s good it’s good. And if it would hurt other
people you then be careful or don’t do it unless there’s a way to make it safe for them.)

So then is there a higher good or more unconditional good? Or, like, what’s the goodness beneath the goodness? Or, maybe
better, what are the dynamics of veridical goodness? As language and ontology and concepts are not arbitrary but loosen
and start to move… And what’s good or what things are good for or what leads to what starts to move…

Or how does one even plan and live when what’s good is slowly and steadily changing, now?

Over time one starts to get a taste of the unconditional and one starts to get a taste of the laws that govern the
dynamics of goodness. (Kant, by the way, I think says that the only instrinsically good thing is the good will.)

And then one can start to live in harmony with one’s own trajectory of self-transformation, in the knowledge that one’s
ontology/concepts and one’s evaluation of that ontology or those concepts, one’s assignation of good and bad, is fluid.
Not arbitrary, but fluid. And so there becomes sort of a goodness behind the goodness

This goodness might be called post-conceptual meta-goodness, or the goodness that is reflectively aware of its own
construction, or reflective participation in the good will, or resting in (ever more) unconditional goodness or
enlightened goodness.

To be sure, I personally am blindsided all the time by being arrogant, horrible, destructive, belligerent, stonewalling,
creepy, sketchy, abusive, cowardly, selfish, ignorant, impulsive, perfunctory, hateful, feuding, controlling—in all
sorts of subtle ways and also just blatantly obvious ways. It’s just right there. Put me in a wide range of unfortunate
circumstances (i.e. life) and I’m just a jerk or worse. If I’m lucky people will tell me; if I’m unlucky they won’t or
I’ll think I’m being gaslit.

And/but, also, there’s this call towards goodness and this discipline of goodness.
Actual-oh-fuck-I-was-wrong-again-and-I-hurt-someone goodness.
Actual-wait-this-goodness-isn’t-good-oh-I-misconceptualized-goodness-again goodness.
Actual-flexibly-stably-intrinsically-motivating-fluid-extreme-problem-solving-problem-dissolving-ability goodness.
Goodness that frees you, goodness that unleashes you, goodness that empowers you. Goodness that supports you in fitting
yourself to the world without diminishment.

A bunch of stuff in the list below is more than a glimpse, now, more than a taste. Stable things somewhere or overtly if
I think to look…

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brahman https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nondualism https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anatta
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tath%C4%81t%C4%81 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Auguries_of_Innocence
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Four_Quartets https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Little_Gidding_(poem) (And I would like to
note that my life is currently all kinds of a mess.)

And it’s kind of weird and exciting that you go through a few rounds of atman dissolving into brahman (what?!), a few
rounds of making deeper contact with the source (what?!), and there’s a sense in which you are not you, that was all a
misconceptualization (what?!). (I still believe in neurons and forces and fields.) And also you feel like you had to
give up everything, and I mean everything, at least once, to get a bunch of it back again.

And also you feel pretty normal. And the world is pretty normal, albeit you’re not confusing the map with the territory,
or at least hugely less so.

And also, noting the possibility of getting hit by a bus or a meteor or cancer, you feel like this is barely even just
the beginning.

And that’s exciting.

 
Appendix for this section:

Is this good for me? Is this good for you? Is this good for everyone? Is this good for me and you and everyone? How do I
know? See also:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bodhisattva https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buddhahood https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arhat
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buddha-nature https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bodhicitta https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saint
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moksha
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nirvana_(Buddhism)#Nirvana_with_and_without_remainder_of_fuel
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turiya


no fixed conceptualized goal or end state part two ("better"):

[Originally published as "better".]

[Last accessed: 20200824 https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2020/07/14/better/]

Sometimes, I sort of want to throw in the garbage concepts like arhatship and other milestones. I’d just like to replace
it with the concept “better.” I like “better” because it doesn’t assume any particular goal. There’s just better than
the last thing. (The reason I use “good” so much in the protocol document and not “better” or even “best” is for local
methodological, pedagogical, and philosophical reasons: better can sometimes be problematic for local, in the trenches
wayfinding. And best is pedagogically misleading and philosophically twisty.)

*

I like better not only because it doesn’t assume any particular goal, and one could clarify that as “no particular
*fixed* goal.” Better doesn’t make a *thing* out of an end state; it doesn’t necessary connote, assume, or imply an end
state at all.

It also doesn’t assume sort of “top-down directionality” or “top-down wayfinding.”

To do better, to go in the direction of better, you just need to take one little step in some better direction.

Ah, but that’s not exactly right.

*

There is another piece that needs to be added to “better” and that’s “nonmonotonicity.” That is, sometimes, to get to
something better, sometimes things need to temporarily get worse. That *dip* is nonmonotonicity. (Monotonicity [as
opposed to nonmonotonicity] is never going down [nor sideways??], only going up, but sometimes there’s going up slower,
sometimes there’s going up faster.)

*

Ok, so with “better” and “nonmonotonicity,” there’s still directions/directionality, there’s still *wayfinding,* in
terms of (a) what to *do* next, and so (b) where to [hopefully or experimentally] *go* next, for (c) to eventually *get*
somewhere (maybe unknown). And that somewhere, the sort of intuitive/implicit/inexplicit/felt *planning horizon* gets
longer and longer, farther and farther out, the more skilled and experienced one gets; one navigates deeper and longer
nonmonotonicity, as sometimes needed, over time.

And there’s always a next somewhere, and the “final” (not final) somewhere (no fixed somewhere) is always over the
horizon. And sometimes one needs to massively backtrack, and that’s ok. There’s time. It’s built in.

*

And, so, you can just keep going. States, stages, gateless gates, stateless states, unconceptualizable states, pristine
states (along some dimensions)—it can be very helpful to have and make maps and milestones. But, traditions recognize
that, say, “deconditioning” continues after arhatship. The path always just continues.

You can just keep going—better and better.

Above, I haven’t talked about how all this is sort of “multidimensional.” Things can be multidimensionally getting
nonmonotonically better (and so also worse) at the same time, along a vast number of dimensions. There’s local and
large-scale tradeoffs, at first. But the sort of “average” of the whole thing keeps getting better and better. And
sometimes there’s big dips, even “late stage” big dips. But some biggest dips eventually just never happen ever again.

And eventually one starts exploring something like globality, optimizing the whole thing all at once (via mostly little,
local operations), while, challengingly, somehow, everything is mediately/indirectly or immediately/directly connected
to everything else. Things deconvolve and de-intertwingle over time, what’s weakly separable becomes weakly separate,
gloriously non-interacting, to some degree, and to greater and greater degrees, when it wouldn’t be helpful if those
things interacted, but it’s still all connected, somehow. It’s the ultimate puzzle, in part because the final goal is
over the horizon and one is learning (and unlearning) better and better goals over time until the idea of a goal itself
gets replaced with something better, too.

*

You can just keep going and going. Eventually meditation blurs and blends with life, being lost in life is the same as
being in the meditative state, effortless, costless, engaged, nothing to maintain; it’s just what you are. You get to
keep all your tools, they become you, they are you, and also you get to just live, to get lost in life, you can just let
go, all the way down, and do what you want because what you want is the right thing to do. (Really right—wellbeing,
self-aligned, nonartificial…)

If you have the right method, and by method I mean, sure, some *invariances,* of course, but also something creative,
nonstereotyped, fine-grain, innovative, that nevertheless-and-in-any-case can navigate, can travel, in straight lines or
along any n-dimensional line, and you just just keep going and going.

Again, you can just keep going and going, better and better.


meditation is concrete problem solving:

full title:

meditation is concrete problem solving, capable of maximal indirectness/obliquity (under/modulo emptiness/nebulosity and
under Buddha-nature)

compare with:

cf./vs. The goal of buddhism/enlightenment/etc. is happiness independent of conditions.

originally published as:

happiness dependent on exquisitely and flexibly handling your shit

original location:

https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2020/06/02/happiness-dependent-on-exquisitely-and-flexibly-handling-your-shit/
(Last accessed: 2020-09-05)

body:

It’s good that morality, horizontal progress, etc., are still emphasized in contemporary, secular meditation systems. I
think this is important because part of my take is that meditation is implicit, concrete problem solving. And, explicit
morality can bootstrap elegant and broadly applicable solutions to life’s problems. (“Becoming intrinsically good all
the way down is the ultimate life hack.”)

But, I can’t help but feel that Ingram’s morality and Shinzen’s horizontal progress are really bolted on, no matter how
much they’re verbally or rhetorically emphasized. I know Ingram devotes even more time to morality in MCTB2.

My straw of the situation is something like, “Morality is really important, but also it’s really complicated. Anyway,
so, meditate, on the cushion, and just kind of proactively do your best, off the cushion. And, meditation is supposed to
help. And, by the way, also, meditation doesn’t help at all.”

That’s a bit of a straw/mischaracterization. But, what???

Bolted on. (Or, I’m being impatient and uncharitable with their teachings.)

In contrast, my take is something like all the meditative attainments or experiences or stateless states are incidental
to the point of the whole thing.

And, gesturing vaguely, the point of the whole might be something like solving all your problems; pursuing the good;
solving homeostasis for all possible futures; having lots of babies; becoming an ever-more-efficient,
far-from-equilibriium entropic dissipator, pursuing interest and intimacy, having a good life, etc.

My point is that there will be something the human bodymind is (a) “trying” to do, which (b) can be modeled as agentic
telos, anthropomorphized or not, which (c) presumably has to perfectly hew to mechanistic, spontaneous causality under
exceptionaless physical law (unified multiversal quantum gravity or whatever we figure out in 100-500 years), which (d)
will *feel* a particular way from the inside, possibly *really good* or “satisfying,” or something.

(The working assumption, here, is that what the human bodymind is “trying” to do, if fully actualized, will look
god’s-eye-view rational and feel good from the inside.)

So, a human is system is bootstrap-learning the rules of the system, as well as doing a halting-problem-blind search of
the goal landscape, while traveling the landscape, all at the same time.

In other words, the system doesn’t know what’s good for it, in advance, or how to get it. It will not be properly
conceived/embodied. But, grace, Buddha, eros, entropic dissipation can contingently get people headed in the right
direction, nonmonotonically, faster and faster (e.g., someone picks up a book about “Zen” meditation or Internal Family
Systems therapy).

And that will involve rearranging the bodymind as well as rearranging the environment (up to and including the entire
planet and beyond). And rearranging the environment, all things being equal, is relatively downstream of rearranging the
bodymind. So, meditation.

So, this is sort of vague and poetic, but meditation isn’t some graft of state training plus following some moral rules
to transcend those rules–

Meditation is solving the problem of optimal behavior (and procreation) under bounded rationality in an uncertain world.
And, the better solutions you have to safety and sex (coordination, intimacy, health, biomedical engineering, space
travel) the better you feel.

The ironic thing is that it’s not about happiness independent of conditions. WRONG!

It’s happiness because you’ve flexibly and exquisitely handled your shit. This is the whole of the path.

Ok, I lied, it’s sort of both, because of long-run-anti-wireheading indirect realism.

One could imagine a system having a “belief” about whether or not it will get (or whether or not it already has) “what
it wants.” The experiences that system has, over time, shape the belief and the want/preference. (The system has a
little bit of hardwiring, some initial conditions plus an environment, and then one just lets it run. The system doesn’t
have a model of any of this when it starts.)

And so let’s say, at any given time, the system is only in four subjective states:

(*) DOOM/NOT GOING TO GET WHAT I WANT (subjectively not going to get what it wants, though it objectively keeps doing
its best, anyway)

(*) DEFINITELY GOING TO GET WHAT I WANT (subjectively feels good, objectively actually uncertain)

(*) NOT SURE IF GOING TO GET WHAT I WANT, DON’T BELIEVE I’M DOING MY BEST (“self conflict”; subjectively feels bad,
objectively actually uncertain)

(*) NOT SURE IF GOING TO GET WHAT I WANT BUT WHOLEHEARTEDLY AND SELF-SINCERELY AND SELF-COMPASSIONATELY AND
SELF-ALIGNEDLY BELIEVE I’M DOING MY ABSOLUTE BEST (subjectively feels good, objectively actually uncertain)

Anyway, I think those four states are roughly how people work. If the bodymind believes it’s doing its best,
wholeheartedly, all the way down, self-consistently, to achieve stable godhood, infinite love-sex, and healthful
immportality free of heat death, or if the bodymind believes in the certain inevitability of eventual stable godhood,
infinite love-sex, and healthful immortality free of heat death, or if the bodymind is presently experiencing stable
godhood, infinite love-sex, and healthful immortality free of heat death–all of those feel theoretically, in principle,
exactly just as good (really good), though the system can still, just fine, discriminate between which of these obtain
at any particular time. Anyway, that’s the theory.

So, again, I think meditation is actually just concrete problem solving that involves picking the correct, initially
unknown problem. (Explicit, lineage-transmissible formulations of the problem+solution only go so far, as we see out in
the world. One has to wayfind to an ever-more-correct internal representation/embodiment to make progress.)

All the emptiness and nondual phenomenology are still a thing, all the different parts of the elephant, including why
traditional systems emphasize morality, compassion, etc. (Heartfelt compassion, all things being long-run equa(!)l, is a
really good way to achieve babies and godhood, or whatever.)

But morality doesn’t need to be bolted on. (Straw?)

Meditation can be concrete planning, intellectual upgrades, morality training, epistemic training, strategic upgrading
that will ingest whatever college textbooks and life experiences the meditator learns to ever-more-optimally seek out.
(Of course, all this will look more like watching the breath or whatever than studying for a test. We initially think
it’s the latter because the normative perpetuation of culture is very wrong about how the bodymind works and most
everybody is “stuck in their heads.” Still, “watching the breath,” or whatever, is also pretty wrong, even though it’s
in the right direction.)

So, I think there’s just “development,” of a single thing (“bodymind”), not vertical and horizontal, where descriptive
meditative phenomenology can be very useful. But, in any case, meditation is not general-purpose strength-training (for
which the fruits are applied off the cushion); meditation, in fact, can be “direct” puzzle-solving and “direct” concrete
upgrading (albeit weird and counterintuitive and up-front costly and risky, otherwise we’d all already be
Einstein-Ghandi-Musk-meditators). I put “direct” in quotes because in one sense it’s direct and in another sense it’s
nonmonotonic and oblique (the details are outside the scope of this rant).

To wrap up, to be fair, sophisticated assessors of meditative progress will pay less attention to phenomenology and more
attention to (a) interpersonal sophistication (which, depending on niche, might look like impeccably kind, authentically
empathetic, local-and-world-scale-win-win-win collaborative reliability) and (b) relative degree of winning at life
(which will look different, depending on whether the person started out abused and poverty-stricken versus a childhood
of complex and interesting experiences and wealthy, kind, empathetic, intelligent parents). And, from the inside, maybe
one might ask, do I experience wellbeing, and do I have a good life, and are those the same thing?


wellbeing and sacrifice:

originally published as:

good now good later wellbeing suffering paradox

original location:

https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2020/05/20/good-now-good-later-wellbeing-suffering-paradox-1300-words/ (Last
accessed: 2020-09-05)

notes:

This should be cleaned up and adapted, in a bunch of ways, to be more appropriate for this location in the document.

body:

All things being equal, human beings are ridiculously ANTI-wireheading.

“I can’t feel ok, now. My life is shit, or falling apart, and/or my life has no meaning or purpose.”

We balk at seeming tradeoffs between something like “feeling good, now” and “good later.” The latter is something like
the OPPOSITE of, “a tiger is behind that tree; and/or I’m going to get fired from my job and end up homeless; and/or the
physical laws and the universal constants of this universe mean that human activity is a zero-sum game, and I’ll never
be safe unless I destroy myself trying to be safe and not even then.”

So, we’ll sacrifice “feeling good, now” for “good later,” if we feel like we have to, to the point of sort coming to
seemingly believe that “feeling good, now” is useless, pointless, or a dangerous distraction.

But there’s the weird thing where our physical body and mind, right here and now, is what enables the pursuit of the
“good later.” Bodily homeostasis is sort of the attractor from which straying too far is disastrous.

Some people intuitively or intellectually recognize the importance of homeostasis or bodily health, while also feeling
that tension of “feeling good, now” versus “good later.” And, they push homeostasis as far as they can, sacrificing
sleep, using stimulants, eating problematic convenience foods, or even explicitly banking on future advances in
healthcare to repair damage done now.

Some people aren’t thinking about health or homeostasis at all, and they come at it from “the other side” (granting that
interoceptive wellbeing informs on the status of homeostasis). They’ve generalized to the point that “feeling good is
bad,” and they strategically avoid feeling good as such: “I’m going to AVOID feeling good, because feeling good, in
spirit or actuality, is the same as twenty hours straight of videogames and total loss of momentum and no progress on
this work project.”

Some people go so far as to confusedly think that “good later” is the only “actual good,” some distant, improper
reification which demands great sacrifices.

***

I want to invent a new word, “teleohomeostasis.” We don’t really need a new word, because people know that homeostasis
can involve future-oriented and goal-oriented cognition and behavior. (And “telos” can be naturalized in various ways in
a mechanistic universe.) See Derek Denton, Terrence Deacon, Karl Friston, Robert Rosen, Anatol Feldman, Alicia Juarrero,
etc.

But, I want a new word because “diachronic is synchronic” (as the above authors say or allude to in various ways):

Any system’s “representation” of the future is somehow encoded or latent in its present structure.

Depending on how that “representation” interacts with “felt wellbeing,” there ideally shouldn’t be a felt paradox
between “good now” and “good later;” there shouldn’t be a paradoxical dissonance or a paradoxical suffering.

Maybe this paradoxical suffering is just our evolved, hardwired human nature, until we start messing with it, with
nth-generation CRISPR and Neuralink.

But there are these weird hints that maybe it’s not hardwired at all. We “doth protest too much,” maybe, in that
ANTI-wireheading of, “I don’t want JUST/MERELY FEEL GOOD (unless maybe I’m transiently utterly dysregulated and
desperate and despairing); I want things to ACTUALLY BE GOOD.”

And when things tick towards being ACTUALLY GOOD, our FEELING GOOD is often only a few hundred milliseconds behind.
(Sometimes it’s a slow dawning.) And note again that interoceptive feeling/wellbeing is intimately tied to
(teleo)homeostasis. Hmm.

(Note that that “tick towards actually being good” can be because you realized a problem wasn’t actually a problem, and
so was DISSOLVED (from inference on prior data or new incoming information) or you figured out a clean solution (or were
handed one), and so was SOLVED (from chewing on available solution pieces/capacities, or friend/family/ally/deus ex
machina). Both SOLVE and DISSOLVE will work, importantly.)

So, anyway, there’s both this seeming paradox between feeling good and having things be good. And, also, there are these
strange links between things being actually good (or getting better) and feeling good.

I’m going to state some principles, now, mostly without justification, which resolve this paradox. I’m partly not giving
justification because I’m still working out some palatable/credible/true/”true” reasoning. And I’m partly not giving
justification because these principles are self-discovered in meditation. Stay tuned for perhaps more details in future
blog posts.

(1) Suffering is not a hardwired, fundamental motivator. It’s actually a stopgap, emergent motivator. There’s no
(intrinsic) suffering “at the bottom.”

(2) Peak wellbeing is not only compatible with peak performance, peak vigilance, and peak contingency planning, but peak
wellbeing is coreferential(?), coextensive(?), perfectly-co-something with peak performance, peak vigilance, and peak
contingency planning.

wellbeing/well-being ~= the state of being comfortable, healthy, or happy. (google)

(3.1) The Human Handledness is Already Success Principle (Human HAS Princple or just “HAS” Principle):

(handled ~= stably controlled, managed, dealt with)

In terms of felt wellbeing, the bodymind doesn’t differentiate between:

(3.1a) “already/currently have stably got it”

(3.1b) “going to definitely stably get it”

(3.1c) “utterly self-believed utterly already perfectly DOING MY BEST to get it, given truly all that is known, that
accounts for literally the whole universe, everything, up to true-event-horizon-bleeding-edge-of-disclosure of
previously-genuine-unknown-unknowns”

(3.2) Put another way, if the bodymind believes it’s acting on the best plan to get something (everything), where “best”
includes fully error-checked and fully meta-error-checked, this already feels like total success (with no
wire-heading-flavored guilt/dissonance).

(3.3) One elaboration is that the hardest most bleak situations can potentially feel like a (seemingly paradoxical, if
one hasn’t experienced it) “real-stakes-vacation-adventure.”

[end indent]

Something like the HAS principle can maybe be used to explain some things (though plenty of objections could be raised,
and additional pieces would be needed to make it airtight):

(a) People put themselves in danger, like free-climbing, to incline towards artificially actualizing the HAS principle.
(One would need to be much more precise and elaborated about my anti-wire-heading statements above, to nail something,
in here, with respect to potentially outside-view-pathological environmental simplifications and stakes-raising.)
And/or, “best plan” can be clarified to explicitly include self-ignorance and mental contingencies under personal
“unknown unknowns.”)

(b) Valued stories maybe exemplify the actualized HAS principle. A protagonist-environment fit that, nearing the climax,
narrows down to an utterly clear best plan and glory, whether success or failure (though success is preferred).

***

So self-discovering and self-aligning with the principles above, and I’ve said things like this a bunch of times, is
like a circa 10,000-hour Tower-of-Hanoi, constrained-evolving-state-space problem, involving arranging and rearranging
millions of Tetris tetraminoes and LEGO bricks the size of quarks, or whatever.

(I’m not done with all this, and “done” probably fluctuates because one keeps acquiring new capacities (which raise the
bar for what the “best plan” is), identifying new challenges/unhandledness via those new capacities (which also raises
the bar), and also previously-truly-unknown-unknowns [relative to one’s local knowledge and all meta-meta-proactiveness]
keep disclosing from the other side of the “event horizon.” But, take this blog post for what it’s worth!)

So like the only shitty things, as I’ve said before, are that meditation is a privilege and luxury that requires some
minimum amount of resources (some combination of time, money, food, shelter, relationships). And, the journey can be
pretty terrible and seem like it’s taken everything from you, to the point of hopelessness, despair, and confusedly
impulsive and risky/destrucive behavior. And there are physical health risks, too. And things feel sometimes/often hard
and sad in the meantime; life is hard and sometimes/often sad. And, it’s worth acknowledging, as always, as an aside,
that not everyone wants to or “should want” to meditate–life is pretty good for a lot of people, and/or they’re doing
the right thing for them that might not look like meditation.

Anyway, we humans have a low-dimensional projection/representation of literally the entire universe, the entire Kosmos,
inside of us. And meditators go over that with a fine-toothed comb, anyway. So let’s make meditation more accessible as
part of that error-checked and meta-error-checked WORLD-WIDE-HUMAN-COLLECTIVE best plan, not to mention world peace;
post-scarcity technological and health/longevity miracles; humane, millenia-long moon-shots, light-cone shots; and like
VR Netflix or something.



ok-ness and cosmology:

/// [Originally published: https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2020/06/22/ok-ness-and-cosmology/ (Last accessed:
2020-09-06)] ///

[Longer title: “ok-ness and wellbeing, cosmology, metaphysics, eschatology”]

[I’m indebted to a few people for some of the prior heavy-lifting and thinking in this post. Mistakes mine.]

[I apologize for the minimally edited choppiness of the prose below.]

*

If you had to pick being in one of the scenarios below, which would you pick? You can modify them as you’d like; it’s
not a forced-choice:

(A) Let’s say you’re a billionaire with smart, kind, loyal friends. And, we could just keep piling it on: Say you’re
part of a post-scarcity economy in an endlessly stable political climate. Say poverty has been solved; say crime and
personal safety have been solved. Say friendly general artificial intelligence has been solved. Say the long-run destiny
of human values and morality are well-understood and it’s humane and exciting. Say the fate of the universe is now
understood, and there’s a way out. Say we can now enumerate and (re-)print out all possible humans—past, present, and
never-before-existing, who would want this for themselves under the conditions they would want it.

(B) Or, let’s say you’re old, sick, alone, and homeless. Sad, scary, tragic stuff. And let’s say, somehow, tragically,
something just escalated and escalated: There’s people who really hate you and want to really hurt you, or worse. Dark,
ugly stuff.

(C) Or, let’s say things are pretty ok: good job and friends, interest and engagement, maybe a family and kids, and, to
be sure, you’ve also got fears and regrets, about intimacy, money, meaning, health, the economy, the political climate,
family members… But, overall, not bad, not bad.

***

First, I want to note that shit happens. We make mistakes, we get hurt, we run out of time, we realize we were wrong,
people disappoint us, we disappoint ourselves, we disappoint and hurt other people, we have life surprises, health
surprises, we hope, we fear, we dream, we get confused, we chase false idols, we get in car crashes or hit by buses.
Life can be hard and painful, whether we have money and friends and health and safety, or not, world-scale projects, or
not, cosmic meaning, or not, and regardless of whether many other desirable factors, all things being equal, obtain, or
not.

Noting that, all things being equal, there’s still a way that things can be ok (if things are not currently ok). And
this ok-ness is extremely, extremely specific and simultaneously also very general. (Cringe, cringe; this isn’t going to
take the usual route; keep your hands and feet inside the blog post. To be sure, in any case, this ok-ness isn’t a
thing.)

As the cliché goes, there’s indeed a sense in which you don’t need anything outside of yourself for this ok-ness,
everything you need is already in you. And, also, there’s a sense in which this ok-ness takes resources—money, food,
shelter, time, space, relationships, knowledge, something.

There’s a few broad failure modes that can happen when seeking this ok-ness (if you decide to do so, and it’s ok if you
do or don’t, or start and stop, or take a break and pick it up again, later. In no way is it separate from “normal
ok-ness.”).

(*) One failure mode is seeking to achieve things that are very specific, very concrete, very hard, and very far away in
time. (That’s not to say seeking to achieve such things is bad, just that it can be a failure mode of being ok.)

(*) Another failure mode is avoiding here, now, and everything, deferring everything, including the experience of this
very moment, until you’re definitely, completely, one-hundred-percent stably, forever ok. And then you can enjoy right
now and relax around people, right now. (This is the “meditation is a valueless slog right up until the instant before
enlightenment, and any benefits of meditation are incidental to attaining enlightenment and facilitating them in any way
might even make enlightenment take longer or make it impossible to obtain/acquire/achieve” model. This is the “separate
thing” model.)

Ok, so, sometimes though, what has to happen, in order to be ok?

Even if things are/seem very not ok, sometimes just a little bit of “grace” is enough. You find an amazing therapist,
you find out you didn’t get the recessive genetic disease, a long-lost relative left you enough money to keep you on
your feet. Something that you thought would be hard is just easy.

Sometimes it takes a little more than that, or a lot more. You might ask, what’s the hit-it-with-a-sledgehammer option,
hit it with a planet, hit it with a galaxy, when it seems like nothing else is working?

This is sort of the meditation option, though plenty of things can feed into that, like e.g. therapy, Alexander
Technique, and all sorts of things. (A good meditation system will indicate and incorporate intersubjectivity and
movement, in any case. But also a good meditation system will sort of “play nice” with all the other good stuff and
people and offerings in the environment that don’t quite line up with the meditation system itself.)

Ok, so what does meditation do, anyway? Why can it sort of be a global option, even if not necessarily the most
efficient one (time- and resource-wise)?

There’s a common misconception that meditation sort of makes you ok with whatever’s going on. This is concerning to
people who want to be motivated by what’s going on, because they care about what’s going on (and what’s going to happen
next), because they want to enjoy it or change it.

(There’s certainly a failure mode of meditation, to add to the two “being ok” failure modes above, which is causing
oneself to be narrowly or broadly unresponsive to broad slices of self and world.)

Anyway, there’s a correction to this misconception that meditation makes one ok, regardless of what’s going on, that is,
ok independent of conditions. Nuh-uh. More correctly, meditation makes one (long-run!) “well-fit” to conditions,
regardless of what they are, and it’s the “fittedness” that yields ok-ness.

(One might ask, well, what if I’m in a crashing plane or being tortured or a loved one just got hurt or… Well, yeah,
those things are bad. Things can be too intense, too fast, too uncontrollable… A meditation master will still claim,
though… And you can explore the limits for yourself, too, in a “natural experiment” fashion, with hints along the way
and better and better models of what’s to come.)

So, actually, the outcome of meditation is extraordinarily concrete, extraordinarily concerned with the concrete details
of one’s life and future. (Though, this isn’t sort of a laborious, forced “mindfulness.” Plenty will be unreflectively
automatized: If there’s details, sensory details or otherwise, that you’d prefer to not get lost in, that’s generally
going to be an option.) There’s things you want to get and there’s things you want to avoid, same as it always is.

So, CONCRETENESS. That’s piece number one.

You’re always going to be living your life. That’s what lives are:

“If[!] you’re going through hell, keep going [as long as you’re applying some sort of Meta Protocol, i.e. going in the
right direction]”

And, I like to combine the above with this extraordinarily deep statement/insight:

“Everything will be okay in the end. If it’s not okay, it’s not the end.” —John Lennon

So, anyway, you keep going and going, putting in the meditation time, and maybe your rigid, impossible future starts to
unravel, and you maybe encounter piece number two: EMPTINESS.

Emptiness could also be termed, in my usages, nebulosity, indirectness, luminosity, etc.

When you started, mountains were mountains, physics equations were physics equations. Now, what the heck are mountains?
What the heck are physics equations? What is anything?

But, this isn’t nihilism; emptiness isn’t arbitrariness. There’s an implicit/inexplicit lawfulness, a lawful evolution
(though even this sentence and its meaning are empty.)

And, further, emptiness is only one side of a coin. The other side is form, structure, territory, actuality, noumena…
(That’s depending how you slice all those concepts; there are more precise and consistent ways to render some of this.)

And, in any case, emptiness is only the beginning.

Because the next thing that starts to happen is that emptiness starts to chew up everything. And that includes things
like the following:

existence, nonexistence, awareness, nothingness, somethingness, death, mortality, furniture, eternity, will,
determinism, goodness, realness, necessity, contingency, duty, responsibility, obligation or lack thereof, freedom,
goals, final ends, big bangs, big crunches, heat deaths, simulations, singularities, infinities, time, space,
relativity, mortality, cryonics bets, the tides of history, the near future, the far future, quantum gravity, the Planck
scale, harm, suffering, sanity, heaven, hell, afterlife, resurrection, eternity, outside-of-time-ness, causal history
and final end of everything

***

One maybe (relatively) unobjectionable claim is that the human bodymind/brain/system/something has a low-dimensional
representation of literally everything inside its “unknown unknown” boundary. We contain (represent) the entire
universe. (Re “representation,” one could potentially make an argument for something like distributed cognition or
question where the representations live or how they’re encoded, enacted, etc.)

For now, again, maybe you’ll grant me that we literally hold (a low-dimensional, variable-fidelity representation of)
the whole (multi/uni)verse in us, including our goals, fears, contingency planning, uncertainties, problems, etc.

I’ll further claim that, whether due to properties of consciousness minds, agency, darwinian evolution or entropic
dissipation under this universe’s physical constants, something, there will sort of be some finite set of necessary
“pieces” that all people are tracking, within that representational unity/totality.

This tracking will be sort of a mixture of explicit or reflective musings, from imagination, religion, fantasy, and
science fiction, as well as implicit/inexplicit, practical “doing models” that have built up, “organically,” bottom-up,
over time. That will all sort of be mixed together, explicit, inexplicit, and entangled with the environment. And there
will be adult stuff as well as childhood stuff, including very young childhood stuff and stuff picked up from other
people. For example, you might have a bunch of heaven and hell stuff, which might be initially surprising, if you come
across it, but less surprising in retrospect. Depending on your very-young childhood background, there could be miles
and miles of heaven and hell stuff, maybe some sort of omniscient and/or omnipotent enabler of timeless intimacy or
connection, as well as, say, depending on what you were reading as a teen or later, a future “Omega-point” situated in a
manyworlds multiverse, and so on, all side-by-side or “scattered throughout” one’s mind.

And maybe there’s a “beginning of everything” and an “end of everything” and a “timeless/eternal ground of all of that,”
and so on.

Point being, the system may not be consistent (well, there are degrees), but the system is reaching for consistency, and
there’s a particular kind of envelope or closure or unity that kind of enfolds or connects all this stuff into one
unified thing. Sometimes it’s very fragmentary, but there’s going to be thin threads that maintain connection, somehow.
(What happens in organic brain damage or neurodegenerative disease is an interesting question, but if a person is awake
and behaving even a little bit coherently then there’s a probably shocking “unity”/”totality” for any of that to be
happening at all.)

One could call all of this COSMOLOGY (and metaphysics and eschatology).

So, anyway, CONCRETENESS is sort of the unignorable sensory ground, though still a heavily interpreted datastream, from
the “outside world,” the thing that pokes you with sticks and surprises you, even if you stop believing in it. EMPTINESS
is sort of the liquid ground that makes change possible. And COSMOLOGY is sort of the interpretive representation or
encoding or explanation of the whole enchilada, as well as what you should do about all of it, how you should act, how
you are acting, what the plan is.

So, in my gestural division, once again, there’s CONCRETENESS, EMPTINESS, and COSMOLOGY.

There’s sort of something sometimes terribly embarrassing, confusing, or scary about cosmology. Cosmology is just as
scary, maybe even more scary, than concreteness. Yeah, you might run out of money, or get hit by a bus, and/or die. But,
of course, what happens after that?And/or, what does it all mean? And, even if you live? What’s going happen, long-run?
What if you get sucked into an interstellar black hole? What happens to your cares and concerns and the people you love,
from your perspective?

It can be confusing and embarrassing to the degree how much cosmology matters to functioning in daily life. Plenty of
people believe in god. And plenty of people believe in a future eschaton, divine or machine. And some people believe in
heaven or the Tao or the multiverse. Or they believe in all of the above, all semi-implicitly mixed together, coming
from various ages and sources and thinking and imagining. And, often we’d prefer to believe (“endorse” believing) in one
of these over all the rest. (And often that preference is leaving out a bunch of “functionally necessary” features, and
something else necessarily, constrainedly needs to pick up the slack, in sort of an
explanatory-unity-or-comprehensiveness-over-explanatory-consistency, or something. And it won’t budge, it won’t
effortlessly flow, otherwise.)

While money and health, concretes, can be super stressful, it’s sort of the cosmology that “tortures” us, as it were: If
we’re, I don’t know, beings of light going to heaven, and we’re here to learn, then a bunch of worldly suffering isn’t
as big of a deal. (Or “nonexistence” isn’t stressful, or it is.) So, as it usually goes, part of us may even believe
that we’re beings of light (or in a benevolent simulation, or going to be cryonically or state-space-exhaustively
resurrected, or whatever). But other parts of us do NOT. And, so money and health are stressful, and there’s also this
sort of “cosmological shear” on top of that, the tension between mediately contradictory cosmological components.

***

So, the reversal, here, is that the fruits/goal meditation is not sort of being ok with whatever is happening or
whatever you believe, independent of the details.

In fact, the fruits of meditation, usually mostly implicitly, are radically embodied (concreteness) and radically
cognitive (cosmology). (Emptiness, which, in some sense, is the other side of the coin of concreteness+cosmology, is
also in some sense a discovered cosmological component, as well as something experienced concretely.) Emptiness does
facilitate equanimity, which is sort of, say, an interaction between concreteness, emptiness, and cosmology, which makes
change and (transient or stable) unknowing safer and safer, as equanimity “grows.” Equanimity does sort of become a
“more and more powerful container of safety,” but it’s, in some sense highly contingent/situated/specific, built out of
progressively handling more and more, and more and more skillfully, in a deeply implicit and wise way. So, it’s not
detachment but is instead concretely engaged wisdom under emptiness, etc., etc.

So, in any case, all of this is sort of one way of looking at why meditation takes so long—in order to sort of not be
“tortured” (as it were, or whatever) by the concrete, sometimes one must refactor one’s entire cosmology, and I think
this is pretty typical, because we don’t really get to choose our cosmologies, at least on the front-end. And so there’s
a lot that’s very fine and also a lot to clean up, down/in there. And usually this has a combinatorial or recursive or
iteratively recurrent complexity, of enacting the dependencies to make something safe to look at, and then looking, and
then retracing and juxtaposing along high-dimensional path constraints… (And this is sort of inseparable from
refactoring one’s phenomenology, and so usually nonduality, centerlessness, etc., pop out, too.)

***

And so, eventually, mountains are just mountains again, physics equations are just physics equations, again.

But, like, is there a right answer? Heaven and hell? God? Superdeterministic quantum gravity multiverse? Yeah, sure, up
to your personal, bleeding-edge unknown unknown boundary. And, you can fallibly tack towards it.

And, in doing so, you may find that concretes get lighter, wellbeing increases, it becomes safe to not know, and also
you do know, but you can say less. I’m not saying you’ll be able to write down novel physical laws or crack open the
universe with the right intonation and gesture. But, you’ll be more comfortable with exactly what is, and where you are
in it, in part because suffering and sort of even meaning are sort of limit cases of when things go wrong, and, because
of grace, buddha nature, evolution, etc., sorting out all this stuff, under emptiness, under ockam’s razor, under
unknown unknowns, is shockingly, generally doable, all things being equal, and it makes things progressively more and
more ok. (Human minds have stunning epistemic abilities, if bootstrappingly used “correctly.”)

And things become more and more stable, too, while remaining sensitive and responsive to new knowledge, new
neuroscience, new physics, new interpersonal surprise:

It can take a lot of work to try to remember that, say, god is infinite and you’re a being of light (or that you’re
experiencing focal bias, or whatever), when, say, your bank account balance is low.

But, in meditation, you’ll sort of be tacking towards a global convexity that doesn’t need to be maintained.

More and more, self and world just are, the world is just right there, just as it is, nothing to change, no effort, and,
more and more, it’s fine/good/ok.

It’s partly fine/good/ok because that fine-ness/good-ness/ok-ness hasn’t made you unmotivated, reckless, nihilistic,
careless. In fact, you’re more safely effective, in part because you’re more careful, more patient, more decisive, more
peaceful, more ambitious, more compassionate, more impassioned, maybe even more afraid (in some sense, because it’s
fundamentally safe to be afraid) while being simultaneously more equanimous and chill and good-feeling. There’s a deeper
thing: sort of less everything and more everything at same time. Sort of “normal” but more “liquid.” It’s a “this too
shall pass” kind of thing, but, again, one that is harmonious with situated action, in a (relatively more sensible)
cosmos. Anyway, none of this is quite right, but I’m pointing in the direction a thing. All in all, you’ll still fully
proactively seek what you want and avoid what you don’t want, and what you want and don’t want will be more liquid but
not arbitrary.

Refactoring your cosmology (as per your bodymind, your felt wellbeing) can be a huge, lengthy, overwhelming (implicit,
liminially cognitive, felt-sensory) project. It’s an insane project, a crazy project, hard to grasp as a whole, on the
front-end. (“Better not to start; if you start, better to finish.”) You maybe should only start after you’ve talked to a
therapist, a doctor, made a big, experimental life change, and/or you’ve accidentally already started. One wants methods
that are sort of simple enough to actually consistently engage in, while “correct enough” to sort of “work eventually no
matter what,” all things being equal.

(But, in a sense, none of this is separate from what you’re already doing, which is just living your life. Some stuff is
“deep” and “stuck” but, some “quite cosmological” stuff is getting sculpted all the time, when making a meal, when
journaling, when spending time with friends. No separation.)

In any case, let’s say you’re systematically applying a method. And then… “impossible” problems, unexpectedly,
unbelievably, are solved and dissolved, one, after another, after another (maybe with very long gaps and low-lows in
between each solve), all things being equal. And after several wildly different “impossible” problems get solved or
dissolved, you start looking at the remaining problems with more and more suspicion and patience (and excitement).

Anyway, probably some of this rendering is terribly misleading, so don’t take my word for any of it.

Wellbeing and enjoyment are good guides, as well as patiently, gently easing into, say, “intolerable” horror, if you
happen to come across any. (There will probably be at least a little bit.) Remember, the whole point of all of this is
something like wellbeing, enjoyment, self-alignment, and whatever follows from that. Maybe things are already pretty
chill. Ask someone who’s pretty chill what their life philosophy is, and they might tell you about their pretty
reasonable thing that works for them, even if it wouldn’t work for you.

Duty, necessity, obligation, should, responsibility, effort, sacrifice, and hardship are not red flags, but they are
yellow flags, at the very least. The dashboard can/could/”should” be green, and/but you might have to refactor your
whole cosmology to get there, and, while this is very doable, all things being equal (money, food, shelter, health,
future money, technique, withstanding) that doable-ness shouldn’t be misinterpreted as one of those shoulds. No gods, no
masters, no point (except your own), as it were.

And the “end” result is sometimes described as things like “fearless simplicity,” “carefree dignity,” effortless,
costless, natural, etc. The WEIGHT OF ALL THAT COSMOLOGY, doesn’t “weigh” anything at all, isn’t a thing at all; it’s
just your effortless being, the very flexible, fluid prereflective seeming of world, lighter than a feather.

***

(P.S. As for myself, I’m not “done,” by the way! Plenty still to do, but it’s been a relatively smooth and
“meta-predictable” ride, for a very long while, etc., etc. At some point, you run out of “meta-surprises,” and you
always, always, always know what to do next, as far as I’ve been able to tell.)

P.P.S. “Cosmology” includes stuff like how does personhood work, how do (body)minds work, what is intimacy, what is
connection/”connection”, etc.



seamless hyphenation [draft]:

[Originally published: https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2020/11/14/seamless-hyphenation-draft/ (Last accessed:
2020-11-14)]

Sometimes people who are *not* novelists, bloggers, entrepreneurs, management consults, programmers, parents,
financiers, CEOs, politicians, scientists, traders, consultants, models, etc., find that they want to *become*
novelists, bloggers, entrepreneurs, management consults, programmers, parents, financiers, CEOs, politicians,
scientists, traders, consultants, models, etc.

Sometimes it seems doable, or one can do some low-cost experimenting to see what it might be like; one has enough time,
enough savings, few enough obligations. Though, sometimes it seems like that ship has sailed–too little time, too little
energy, money, health, youth, something.

(All of this applies to not only “career,” “income,” “impact,” something. All of this also applies to things like
wanting to be cool, loved, loving, confident, etc., too.)

In any case, I think people often oscillate between, on the one hand, excitement and optimism about becoming something
different, and, then, on the other hand, at least at the extremes(!), a sense of resignation, futility, or despair.

People do change their lives, all the time, of course. People accidentally find their niche, or have an epiphany, or a
catch a break. Something “just starts working.” And/but, people also have the intuition that some kinds of big life
changes can be quite hard, can realistically take years or a decade, and often involve some kind of safety net, which
might just be youth; or parental support; or savings from a former, high-paying life; or hard-won, opportunity-costly
knowledge about how to be frugal; or a tremendously supportive community, or other significant resources.

In any case, a question one might ask, is how might someone *systematically* become something/someone different? (And
what are the pitfalls and paradoxes involved in that!?) And, here, for the moment, we’re at least *temporarily* setting
aside questions of food, shelter, money, opportunity cost–just, what are the gears-level things that need to happen, for
true, deep, change, on the level of, say, “deep bodymind”?

Those gear-level things are somewhat outside the scope of this blog post, but there are at least two reasons that change
of this kind is so hard. One is at least counterintuitive, and the other is at least paradoxical.

The counterintuitive thing is just how much, how expansively, how seemingly heterogeneously the things are, that
sometimes need to change, for a person to change. One typically doesn’t have a model, a feel, a sense, of what all these
things might be. They all fit together at “the level of mind,” but teasing them out, semi-explicitly, can look pretty
weird. It’s maybe stuff like this:

* …
* self
* personhood
* world
* universe
* eschatology
* cosmology
* …
* the experiential/phenomenological field
* …

The above items aren’t mutually exclusive, though they’re arranged somewhat in order of expansiveness or inclusivity.
You might note that I phrased it above as these items *themselves* need to change. That might seem kind of weird–the
“universe” needs to change, for you or your life to change?

What I really mean is that your “model” of “the universe” needs to change, rather, the “very preflective seeming” that
is, in part, your “physically embodied, moment-by-moment anticipations” that somehow involve “the universe,” that need
to change. (One’s “model” could be the reflective, explicit part of that.)

People change, all the time, for much less. But, sometimes, the whole universe needs to change.

Items in the list above might be counterintuitive for different reasons, but I want to focus, in particular, on
“personhood.”

People often have the experience, even when they kind of like the different parts of their life, of all those parts not
quite fitting together. Something is bursting at the seams. But, their life goes on, their relationships continue, maybe
indefinitely, their career continues, maybe indefinitely. So, it’s not exactly the “external” roles and obligations that
are bursting at the seams, they just keep happening, steady state, but instead one’s “sense” of all of it, one’s
embodied feeling, sense, deep-down planning, the constellation of sensory anticipations and physical actions that make
up them doing all of that:

Somewhere there’s a little bit of shearing, a little bit of grinding, a little bit of jamming, and so there’s some
stress, some shortness with loved ones, some muscle tension, ongoing “unsurprising surprise,” because something,
somewhere isn’t able to learn.

For there to be, instead, costless ease, a seamless life, sometimes a person’s very concept of a person needs to change,
maybe subtly.

The way this goes, is, usually, a person’s intuitive concept of all the ways a person can be becomes more expansive, the
basis vectors change, and then a pin is dropped, on the map: YOU ARE HERE…and perhaps you could be THERE. The voice can
be soft. The reconfiguration profoundly shocking. This is sometimes on such a low, low level–the sensemaking of the
blooming, buzzing confusion–it changes.

So that’s the counterintuitive piece; now, there’s the paradoxical one.

We’ve all heard things like this before, “what you resist, you’re stuck with.”

There’s such danger in “deliberate, systematic, directed,” change. First, where we’re pointed is usually somehow
incorrect, some deep error of conceptualization or misunderstood personal preference, ignorance about the personal
goodness/badness/possibility of the thing. That’s usually fine, when one starts with little bets as well as care, to
mitigate overcommitment! (Granted, the bigger and more monolithic the decision is, the higher the potential stakes.
College majors and career decisions, I hear you.)

Second, though, and this one is killer, “directed change” can sometimes mean away from something, in this case, parts of
yourself, and this can be disastrous. So instead of away from yourself, you must somehow, at least first, if not
forever, move towards yourself:

For you to become anything *else*, anything truly new, for you, you must somehow, simultaneously, become ever more
*yourself*, in some sense, as you always, already, now and forever *were*, and will forever *be*.

And this is sometimes terrifying, the feeling of fucking cruel, cosmic joke. What if one hates oneself, seemingly
irrevocably and irreparably? Sometimes: self-disgust, cringe, shame, horror–all of which, that you will always have
been, written into the past, written in stone. Who wouldn’t, sometimes, want to reflexively try to smash all that out of
existence? A bifurcation, a discontinuity, at least a forgetting, by you and everyone else–and then, finally, you can
start to live your real life.

But no. That’s not how it works; that’s not what minds are. Usually, maybe, probably always, for the deepest changes, at
least, you have to go back, all the way, for all of it.

It turns out, in the end, that it’s ok. All the things you thought and did, your causal history goes through structure
preserving transformations–the feel of it gets to change, almost nothing is what you thought it was, no matter what it
was and is. It’s ok.

***

A bit of a tonal change, here:

I thought young kids often spontaneously hyphenate their aspirational professions? (I thought this was more of a thing,
but google is failing me.)

* “Librina” (a librarian ballerina)*
* magician-scientist (that was/is me; true story)
* [add more, here]

Somewhat tongue-in-cheek, this online article** suggests grown-up versions:

* makeup artist-influencer-accountant
* lawyer-model-blogger
* actor-director-entrepreneur
* digital-strategist-ice skater

Sometimes having a “hyphenate” career or life (or multiple jobs) is an act of desperation.

But, I think lots of people crave a sort of heterogeneous seamlessness:

* homemaker-adventurer
* avenging valkyrie-mom
* dad-entrepreneur
* spouse-astronaut-world saver
* financier-bitcoin millionaire-lover-traveler
* blogger-scientist
* captain of industry-community organizer

Modulo resources, privilege, and more, and often even then, with the right tools and avoiding counterintuitive and
paradoxical failure modes, why not?

To be sure, you may have to walk through hell and give up far more than you ever thought you’d get in return, and what
you finally end up with may look nothing like you thought it would, and that might be heartrending on the front end.

But you may end up with a seamlessly satisfying life.

***

*https://www.fatherly.com/love-money/the-2017-imagination-report-what-kids-want-to-be-when-they-grow-up/ [last accessed
20201114]

**https://www.popsugar.com/smart-living/What-Multi-Hyphenate-Career-45742128 [last accessed 20201114]



other practices: (draft)

If you have the time and money, I don’t know, maybe find a good therapist (one in 1000-10,000), go get therapy or
psychoanalysis.

If your friends are into interesting practices, go explore with them.

Everything can be integrated. Live your life, have all the experiences (as makes sense), read all the books. Learn all
the options and the degrees of freedom. The practices in this document are intended to both be load-bearing and to fill
in the cracks when something better isn’t available.

There’s some narrow sense in which these practices can “do it all,” get someone all the meditation-y goodness, heal
trauma, alter preferences and behavior, increase wisdom, increase moral intelligence. These practices are ideally an
absolute bootstrapping foundation that can fill in any missing cracks. It can be worth it to clocks thousands and
thousands and thousands of hours on these practices alone. It can be worth it to be narrowly hardcore with these
practices.

But.

Use everything. Use all of it. There’s better and worse, and choices matter, but, ultimately, late-stage, end-game,
there’s no relevant distinction these practices, any other practices, and life itself.

Lots of solo time is needed, and sometimes solo time is the only thing available, but someone who’s having a rich
variety of experiences with a rich variety of compassionate, intelligent, interesting people will progress (possibly)
faster (and possibly more safely), all things being equal.



culture and community:



evil:


part X: introduction:

If you start doing work on yourself, you’ll become more sensitive to a lot of things. And that sensitivity, initially,
can make you more vulnerable to bad things than you’d otherwise be. That sensitivity can also make you become a more
dangerous or harmful person to be around, initially. Over time, asymptotically, nonmonotonically, what you were
vulnerable to, what used to influence you or cause disendorsed changes to you, becomes just information. And this
information can be used to enhance safety for self and others. And your sensitivity and responsiveness, from ongoing
meditation, and the knowledge that’s easier to acquire because of that sensitivity and responsiveness, can make you
safer and safer for other people.

Additionally, you may more often find yourself in communities of practice, as you explore things like meditation, energy
work, shamanism, or whatever. Communities of practice sometimes have coercive things “in the air,” and sometimes
communities of practice contain, or have adjacent, “dark wizards,” and sometimes they are created, run, influenced, or
ruled by “cult leaders.”

Reading the sections below may help to minimize risks to self and others, in relation and in community.


part X: a brief layer model of mind, personality, groups, and (global) culture:

Consider the mind to be made up of a large number of parallel (information) flows, or pipes, or tubes.

Countless numbers of these tubes all happening, all at once, is you.

Sensory information goes in one end of a tube (sensation) and immune system, hormonal, glandular, smooth muscle, and
skeletal muscle activity goes out the other end of a tube (actuation).

Tubes can be short and long.

A short tube goes from input to output, sensation to actuation, in a small number of milliseconds.

A long tube goes from input to output, sensation to actuation, taking hundreds of milliseconds.

In addition to normal input (sensory information; sensation), some tubes can incorporate information from other tubes
prior to termination (actuation). And, in addition to normal termination (skeletal muscle, etc.; actuation), some tubes
pass information to other tubes. Information transfer happens at junctions. [Note that this theory doesn’t have any
“fully internal tubes” or tubes that are “sensation+internal” or “internal+actuation.” A future theory might need to
allow for this.]

When tubes pass information to other tubes, (internal) loops/cycles can form.

There is a shortest possible length of tube.

There is a shortest possible length of loop.

Below a particular tube length, there can’t be any loops.

Sensation alters tube lengths and junctures. (And actuation influences sensation.)

Some tubes pass through awareness. These are awareness tubes. If those tubes happen to have junctures with other tubes,
then we can experience the sensations passing through those other tubes. (And, we can participate in our actuations via
external loops.)

Tubes that happen to have junctures with awareness tubes are called junctured awareness tubes. Some tube lengths and
junctures can only be modified or created when the relevant tubes are currently junctured awareness tubes.

When junctured awareness tubes are very short and contain no loops, then there is no self-experience, and “in the seeing
there is just the seen,” “in the hearing there is just the heard,” “in the feeling there is just the felt,” “in the
doing, just doing,” etc. There is just “what it feels like.”

When there are loops in or proximal to junctured awareness tubes then there is self-experience. There is, partially,
“what it feels like to be you.”

Countless tubes at any given time are junctured awareness tubes, but most tubes at any given time are not junctured
awareness tubes.

When loops are minimized there cannot be contention or compensation.

When loops are minimized there cannot be improperly reified concepts.

A state of minimal loops is primordial or natural (though not necessarily ordinary).

The minimization of loops correlates with but does not guarantee constructive, good behavior. The minimization of loops
correlates with but does not guarantee the absence of destructive, bad, unskillful, and evil behavior.

Contention can cause ill-health, accelerated aging, excessive actuation, and suffering.

Contention in junctured awareness tubes is experienced as logical contradiction and (sometimes extremely subtle) muscle
tension.

Compensation can be locally elegant but is globally inelegant.

If someone has a problem, a loopless solution to that problem will not have any compensation. A non-loopless solution
will have compensation. Compensatory solutions are much easier to find than loopless solutions. Loopless solutions are
minimally costly in the limit. Compensatory solutions are locally costly. The greater the accumulated cost, the harder
it is to find additional solutions. The lower the accumulated cost, the easier it is to find additional solutions,
though the solution-finding process may still be lengthy.

An example of compensation is “I’m doing X which is bad but if I also do Y then it will cancel the bad effects of X.”

Compensation is usually not perfect and so begets further compensation. An example of this is “I’m doing Y to compensate
for X but Y creates a further problem Z so I must do R to compensate for Z but R also has a problem…”

Compensation is fractally self-similar. That is, micro-compensation produces larger-scale patterns of compensation.
Examples of larger-scale patterns are tics, neuroses, hangups, blindspots, personality disorders, etc.

Compensation can produce occlusion. Occlusion is when tubes are not and cannot easily or quickly become junctured
awareness tubes.

Large-scale compensation and occlusion produces personality layers. If experience happens too quickly, too surprisingly,
or too traumatically than personality layers are more likely to form.

So, someone can have childhood confusions or uncertainties or inabilities and/or (by defintion unhealed) hurts and
traumas, and, on top of those, have adult-style regulation. (That adult-style regulation will be crippled in many ways
because of the excessive cost of compensation. That person might read lots of books on e.g. relationships, but, without
delayering, their relating might remain laborious and “unnatural.”)

Because of mimesis, love, power, and technology, compensation and layering can extend to groups, cultures, and society.
There are global-scale cultural layers, in part produced through famine, colonization, war, etc., as well as locally
adaptive but global maladaptive traditions of child-rearing, etc.

Individual and group practice can de-layer and de-compensate, solving problems without the use of compensation, until
individuals, and even communities, or larger, are relatively natural. Again, compensation is necessary and adaptive. And
naturalization only guarantees a subset of good things, with opportunity costs. It is only better, all (other) things
being equal.


part X: the blooming, buzzing confusion:

Layering and occlusion can make it very hard to turn tubes into junctured awareness tubes. But, sensation and actuation,
the inputs and outputs of tubes can’t be blocked. Sensation is always happening for all of a person’s tubes, at every
layer. And actuation is always happening at the termination of every tube.

If an adult has childhood confusions or uncertainties or inabilities and/or (by defintion unhealed) hurts and traumas in
their system, then this can be problematic because that childhood self can be triggered. And then that person’s
behavior, in a particular situation, will have behaviors reminiscient of childhood, which can be inappropriate,
maladaptive, or dangerous to relationships or livelihood. So this must be careful managed.

A person manages always-triggerable lower layers by reducing the scope of their lives (never entering particular
situations), creating controlled situations (only entering situations that they themselves have carefully prearranged),
managing attention in situations (carefully using actuation to manage the sensation stream), or arranging temporary
compensatory sinks (teeth-gritting, white-knuckling, stomach-clenching, etc.). [An alternative, of course, if resources
are available, is to take the time to naturalize layer after layer, to find noncompensatory solutions and thereby
widening the scope of life.]

A person will have learned to manage some of their lower layers. But, typically, many layers (and “pockets”) will not be
well-managed. A further complication is that lower layers, while not always, tend to be occluded and so can be affected
outside of awareness and those effects may be hard to infer from downstream, ramified experiences. In short, it’s
possible for vulnerable lower layers to become traumatized or further traumatized. (A way to restate this is that tubes
can be receiving input from the outside world, but that reception and its proximal downstream effects might be outside
personal awareness (though potentially evident in behavior that's observable by other people), and distal downstream
effects (eventually, in milliseconds to days) *will* be in personal awareness, though not connected to the relevant
(maybe high-dimensional, thin-slice) "causes" from the world. Over time, a person gets ever-better at connecting
inputs/causes to effects.)

It gets worse in that everyone, at all layers have both functional ontologies as well as remaining blooming, buzzing
confusion (as per William James). That is, everyone has patterns of input that can produce hard to predict effects in
the system. This is a further dimension of vulnerabilitiy.

To explain further, when we were at our youngest, while we have genetic predisposition towards certain types of
interpretations, the world doesn’t come pre-given. We have to assemble feeling, sound, light, touch, etc., into
appearances, inferred objects, causal relations, and proactive management of self and environment. Prior to this, and
always alongside this, there is blooming, buzzing confusion. There is “static,” “noise” limning the edges of experience
and even shot through all of experience, the “feel of reality.”


part X: the demon-haunted world and science as a candle in the dark (as per Carl Sagan):

And, so, this static, this noise, this blur that colors everything, and it comes in layers, there is some at every
layer—this is the domain of shamans, of magick, of the siddhis, of the powers.

Western and so-called “universal culture” has factored away much of this blur into legible ontologies and compenstory
pockets.

But consider, childhood fears—monsters, ghosts, etc. Consider cultural and religious—demons, hells, etc. Consider
childhood extremity—terror, loss of control, disregulation, bullying, abuse, violence, hatred.

Also consider, adult desperation around money, poverty, power, status, sex (coercive fantasy and actuality in kinks,
fetishes, and paraphilias), intimacy, belongingness, health, aging, sickness, and death.

Consider the desperation of infant, child, adult to affect the mother, peers, adults, the powerful, and vice versa.
Consider the childhood insecurities and fears still layered into the adult narcissist, the adult schizoid, the adult
borderline.

Consider how desperately, out of love and fear, how desperately people are trying to affect each other all the time.

Consider that what the brain does is make sense of blooming, buzzing confusion, to find signal in noise. Consider as
well that those vast number of tubes. Consider our sensitivity to transduce single photons. Consider facial expressions,
flickering of the eyes, body language, voice tone, timbre and prosody. Consider temperature fluctuations in the air.
Consider subtle changes in air currents as we move our limbs. Consider those vast degrees of freedom as well as that
sensitivity. Consider the heights of skill of say olympic athletes versus weekly joggers.

And then is it any wonder that hapless creeps, dark wizards, cult leaders… and healers walk among us?


part X: everyday blah, hapless creeps, dark wizards, and cult leaders:

The mind is vast and occlusion is a thing.

On the surface, most people genuinely and authentically want to be good to people and to be better people. Almost
everyone has at least a little vicious hatred, or ill-will or at least just reckless terror at lower layers. Those
negative things will typically be latent in lower layers. But they can be triggered under the right circumstances.

And, upon being triggered, negative behaviors, both gross and subtle, will feel *right*, *normal*, *appropriate*,
*justified*. And then that person will do obvious or subtle bad things.

The obvious stuff is bad enough, from glaring to shouting or even hitting. But the subtle stuff can be really bad, too.
It can be coercive, soul-damaging—it can create vulnerabilities which beget further harm.

We all do things we don’t endorse. We all can cause subtle harm. And, if we had adult abuse in our past, sometimes we
can do harm “above our weight class,” and it’s very regretful.

The above few paragraphs describe the spectrum from everyday blah all the way to hapless creeps.

The is a worse level, which is that of the “dark wizard.” For the previous level, the ability to do harm is accumulated
incidentally and unsystematically. But, a dark wizard systematically cultivates the ability to influence people. This
can be both “deliberate and unreflective/accidental,” “deliberate and reflective.”

For the “deliberate and unreflective/accidental” category, a good example of this is in relation some kinks, fetishes,
paraphilias (and also “vanilla-sexual”). Some kinks are pure fantasy, some involve “consentual nonconsent,” and some,
usually disendorsed, involve the actualization of nonconsent, either incidentally or essentially.

Unfortunately, all of those cases can potentially produce unwanted effects in other people because, even for the pure
fantasy cases, there can be “actualization bleed.” And, often people have lower-layer material/“tubes”/etc that want to
realize some “actual nonconsent,” even if this is disendorsed by much else of the system. And even if this is
compensated for at the higher layers. There can still be subtle, harmful effects between people via lower levels.

The situation is analogous for safety/control fantasies and revenge fantasies. (For the safety/control case, the person
wants other people to behave in highly specific ways so that that person can feel safe. Often, this will be in
childhood, parent-child, or religious ontologies.)

In all of these cases, sexual, control, revenge, the person is cultivating the thoughts, fantasies, beliefs, material,
behaviors over time. There’s something building up over time and becoming more powerful, more effective, more insidious,
even if unintentional.

It would be a much better world if people’s sexual fantasies stayed safely inside our heads, but unfortunately this
isn’t always the case. And that’s pretty intense, but it seems to be true. The worst of this, here, is perhaps
“community sexual predators” that are somehow “more effective or successful than they should be.”

Moving on from “deliberate and unreflective,” pickup artistrty (PUA), “business influence,” and “persuasion” type books
are in a gray area between “unreflective” and “reflective.” The person is systematically cultivating *something* but the
ontology is pretty intrisically low-key, relatively speaking, as compared to sexual stuff or what follows below.

In “deliberate and reflective” proper, these are people that are reading spellbooks or doing chaos magic or summoning
demons or dabbling in curses and in any case deliberately seeking to influence people for personal gain. There are
cringy and toothless versions of this, and there are very, very terrible versions of this. Remember, all of this has
naturalistic explanations, but the layers of the mind reify things and we experience it as real. And it can drive up
blood pressure and cause heart attacks and stroke, subtly or grossly reduce quality of life forever, drive people
insane, tear communities apart, etc. And, all the while, there is gaslighting and self-gaslighting that that isn’t
what’s happening.

Historically, and in some places contemporaneously, each village had a shaman to deal the intentional and unintentional,
from blah to terrible, stuff happening between people and villages/tribes/etc.

Cult leaders will be discussed more below.


part X: spot the dark wizard:

A final note is that, if you’re trying to influence people at all, if you have any perceived *need* at all with respect
to other people (belonging, care, money, intimacy, sex), unless you and everyone are in a tremendously high-resourced
environment, and everyone is engaged in mutually creative synergy, then you’ve likely got at least some baby dark wizard
going on, or some latent dark wizarding that could get triggered.

And if you’ve been cultivating, ruminating, working over, developing in/on/over anything that in some way involves
thinking, other people, or influencing other people, then you’ve likely got something either full-on dark wizardy or
something that could easily be converted over to dark-wizard-ness with the right push.

This section is not to normalize the above, though. (“Oh, he’s saying everyone is a dark wizard, ok, so it’s not that
bad.”) This section is a warning. In other words, if you don’t think you can’t have “things that are that bad” in you,
or you don’t think things in you will bleed out into the world, or you are “good at mind stuff” or “good at ethical
interaction,” then you should probably be very careful. These are all surfaces areas for you to do unrelfective harm.
And doing transformative practices can make things worse, in the short-term or for a long time.

If you see yourself as a helper or a healer, this is also a yellow flag. Often “helping” or “healing” can contain
perversity, not just good but also harm. And the goodness makes it harder to see the harm.

There’s nothing to be ashamed of, here. Layering and misconceptualization or non-conceptualization mean that it can take
time to find the bad stuff, sometimes years.

But given that it’s possible to hurt people in the meantime, one should be listen to people when they say you’re being
weird, creepy, harmful, etc. (Sometimes it’s munchausen or gaslighting when people say they’re being harmed, but you
have to do due diligence—it could be both partially not your responsibility and partially you doing harm. If you dismiss
people’s concerns as not valid then that’s a red flag that you’re at least low-resourced and probably doing additional
harm on top of the dismissal.)

You have to be ready to isolate yourself, to walk away, and sometimes you should let people excommunicate you.
Sometimes, it will be the case that you were in an unhealthy environment, and you defending yourself is further hurting
people around you. But “active” defenses mean you aren’t skilled enough yet. When the environment becomes “just
information” as opposed to something that needs to be defended against then you can consider yourself skilled. At that
point you won’t be “actively” hurting people in such an environment, but they could still experience your being there as
harmful because of things in them that don’t want to be exposed, even passively via your side, to things in you.
Sometimes it can take a very long time to figure out who’s doing or not doing what to whom, and it’s better to just not
interact.


part X: healers:

Healers, bodyworkers, energy healers, reiki practioners, healing touch practitioners, qigong practitioners, exorcists,
shamans, etc., can be great. Keep in mind that there is a vast range of skill. Some people are completely ineffectual.
Some are very effective but cause both harm and good things at the same time. The rare individual with decades of
(lineage?) training and experience is excellent. (And some “healers” are dependancy-inducing predators.)

Minds are vast, people have weird beliefs, and the mind makes it real. Healers work in different paradigms and so there
can be ontology shear and effect shear. Healers might have different beliefs than you (and your mind) about what changes
are good and bad, and when, and why, and how. Healers will have their own blindspots and malevolent layered intentions.
Healers can sometimes pick up lots of bad stuff from people they’re trying to heal (or teachers that they’ve worked
with) that they haven’t entirely cleared themselves. And then they can pass it on to you. And sometimes healers can have
bad days where they’re mean and ill-willed.

If someone has been practicing for decades and you can talk to other people they’ve worked with who say good things,
then they might be a good fit for you. If someone has seemingly produced miracles (they’ve gotten a stroke victim to
walk again or otherwise given someone their life back) but they seem creepy to you, then it might be better to stay
away. (Most reading this will not be in need a miracle that they cannot ultimately produce themselves, possibly on a
faster timeline with less resources.)

Generally speaking, for serious meditators, there are very quickly diminishing returns for working with healers.
Meditation is essentially self-sufficient, self-healing that “goes all the way,” all things being equal. Sometimes a
healer can get you out of a rut or help you deal with an acute issue. Often, maybe almost always, you’ll have to rework
whatever they did, in the future. Maybe almost always, what healers do are just a temporary patch, for a serious
medtitator. (For non-meditators a “patch” can be life-saving. Just different needs for different life trajectories.) So,
sometimes it’ll be net good and sometimes net bad.



part X: witch hunts, vulnerabilitiy, contagion, tragedy of transformation, community decompensation:

It can be hard to assign blame and decide what to do. We all can have layered material that can be vulnerable in
idiosyncratic ways. Someone can have a sex or revenge fantasy that they’re barely broadcasting, that wouldn’t affect 95%
of people. But, when you’re in a room with them, it does awful stuff to your system. So who’s at fault? In this case
mostly nobody, but there’s still the issue that you can’t be in a room with them. It might be both people’s
responsibility to change. The person with the fantasy to figure out how it’s bleeding into the world a little bit. And
you to figure out why it’s affecting you. But, for one or both of you, that could be hundreds of hours of work (though
which will produce all sorts of collateral positive effects along the way), and one or both of you might not currently
be systematic meditators.

It gets harder when the content is occluded—one person might be competely unaware that something is bleeding through or
that it even exists. Or they might sort of know but reflexively gaslight that it isn’t happening. Or they might be very
scared and angry that a) they might be hurting people or b) that their fantasy isn’t actually private.

To make things even more complicated, people can manufacture or play up harm. They can accuse people of not just being
creepy but also being subtly harmful. And sometimes they’ll be right, but it will be low-grade harm, and sometimes
they’ll be mistaken, but some part of them, reflectively or unreflectively wants it to be true because it would be
convenient if it were true.

To make things even *more* complicated, often people who are vulnerable to what another person is doing will in some
sense *want* to be affected, in part, by what the other person is doing. Usually what the other person is doing will
have “good” parts and “bad” parts, and a person’s system will “unreflectively/subconsciously choose” to take the bad
with the good, in order to get the good. This will usually be reflectively disendorsed—the “good thing” upon
examination, will be confused, somehow—but can still, in some sense, be used to point to complicity on the part of the
person being affected. [One way of becoming less vulnerable, by the way, is to make it safe to see what is or feels good
about what’s happening, or the current thing in the system, and to find a healthier version of the attractive but
disendorsed thing, which can replace the net bad package as well as the receptive surface] In any case, often the
seemingly good thing will in some way have been sculpted to have that attractiveness/temptation, and so on, to make it
more likely that people will be hooked by it. And often the person who has the attractive/tempting thing will (at least
eventually if not immediately) reflectively disendorse it being that way, too.

This is all very hard.

There is an additional phenomenon of people believing that they are protected by their rationality, reaonabilitiy,
belief in science, or strength of will. But, very often, such people will still be affected in occluded layers. And so
their behavior will become more harmful, because they themselves have been harmed by something, but they will be
resistant or unable to investigate this. And they might also further transfer bad things to other people; they might
unknowingly pass bad stuff along. Such people are good candidates for interaction with a healer, if they agree to it.

Another problematic thing that can happen is, when someone becomes a systematic meditator, they can start decompensating
in ways that influence occluded material. They might have cycles of increased desperation or neediness that bleeds
through in problematic or intense ways. And people who are good-faith trying to become safer to be around, or just
better people, can actually become more dangerous to be around for a period of time. This extends to communities as
well. For a community of self-transformers, things can get much, much, much worse until things get better—lives can be
ruined and communities can get torn apart, even as people just wanted to get better together. All the bad stuff can come
out in insidious and explosive ways.


part X: timelines and stopgaps and sanity checks:

Part of what makes this so hard is how long the timelines are. Self-transformation takes thousands of hours, and
people’s patterns of vulnerability to each other are idiosyncratic. So if harm is occurring, it can take dozens,
hundreds, or thousands of hours to to sort out who’s doing what to whom and to fix it. And this is superexpontential the
more people that are involved.

Sometimes people just need to stop associating, even if they were lovers, friends, or colleagues before starting to
self-transform. And this can be tragic when a relationship or community has formed with the best of intentions. (But
people do grow apart under “normal” conditions, too.)

Discussing all this stuff up front can help. Documents like this can help. Effective self-transformative practices like
the ones in this document can help.

If one is exploring the many protocol with people (see further in the document), it can be helpful to start very, very
slowly, maybe just five minutes per day for months, or to not do it at all with some combinations of people. Sometimes
solo transformation only is a better choice for a community.

It can be helpful to just leave the room for five minutes, if something is going on, to metabolize it and maybe come
back more resilient.

If you feel buzzing or tingling in your body, localized or not, or the air seems “thick” or “shimmery,” or the reality
of the room seems to become “less,” that doesn’t mean something is bad is necesarily happening, but something is
probably happening.

But remember the issues with witch hunts, manufactured victimhood, and determining harm. But also remember the reality
of gaslighting. If something feels wrong, something is wrong, somewhere.

You can intend to know exactly what’s going on. And you can intend to have a solution that’s good-faith, good-will for
everyone. Sometimes you’ll need to leave or have people leave. But hopefully you won’t. May the best thing happen for
everyone.


part X: the late-stage meditator in community

People often become more sensitive and more vulnerable at first, possibly for months or years. But eventually…

This is just a conceptual model. The reality of it *feels* different, maybe, sometimes. But the below is a good way to
provisionally think about what happens for a late-stage meditator.

So the late-stage meditator is mostly de-layered, de-occluded. They have access to most of their stuff, and most of
their stuff healed or grown up or a bit wiser. Two particular dimensions are important, here:

The first is the dimension of self-other confusions. We can pick up stuff from other people and think it’s ours, think
that it is us. And this becomes actuation just like everything else in our system. That part of us literally thinks its
an extension of the other person, it feels like the other person from the inside. Any part of us that’s a little bit
confused about self versus other can acquire “otherness” at any point during our lives. Over time, the systematic
meditator helps their parts realize who they belong to and to realize that they only have to be themselves. Those parts,
all things being equal, become “invulnerable” to future otherwise potential incidents of self-other confusion.

(Remember, you’ll always be bathed in the stuff, all the time. But it becomes information instead of influence.)

The second dimension is that of goodness/badness inversions. Sometimes we think something is good when it’s actually bad
and vice versa. And often it’s highly contingent and contextual as to whether something is good or bad. And somethings
can benefit one person at the expense of another. And childhood parts and layers can be quite confused or jumbled as to
what’s good and bad, especially in cases of neglect and abuse but where that person was still dependent on an adult for
love and protection. This can ramify as goodness/badness/self/other/boundary issues throughout a person’s system. A
person is much more vulnerable to coercion when they believe something is good for them that is actually bad for them.
They will “receive” material, content, intentions, will from another person to placate them, to be loved, all sorts of
things, that might locally seem good to an occluded part is in fact terrible for the system as a whole. Over time, the
late-stage meditator becomes wise and that wisdom percolates through the entire system. And, over time, the late-stage
meditator is less and less likely to make local, perverse tradeoffs involving acceptance of ultimately unnecessary
influence from other people.

So self/other confusions and good/bad inversions can be abstractly considered as the main sources or enablers of subtle
interpersonal disendorsed effects.

(You may wish to temporarily skip to “part X: the quiet interaction and the beauty of subtle interpersonal effects”
before moving foward.)


part X: cult leaders:

Cult leaders are different. Anyone, including cult leaders, can change with luck and likely thousands of hours of work.
But, a cult leader that’s a cult leader, right now, is different.

Bad things happened to them (very) early in life, or they responded to normal or bad early life things in particularly
unfortunate ways. And then bad things accumulated on top of that. And now they are like this:

1) Most people aren’t trying to affect *everybody* like they’ll be affecting “peers” or “potential lovers” or “direct
competitive threats” or “people who are the object of my sexual fetish”. And it won’t be turned on all the time. But
some people, e.g. cult leaders, want to “affect all humans all the time” in some way or some significant subset of that.

2) Not all effects have “teeth” in that there could be a superstitious element, like, the person is “doing a thing” like
wanting people to die or be angry, and people are picking that up, but it’s not actually causing people to do that
thing. Cult leader stuff will have teeth.

3) There’s an issue of “grain,” like people do have filters, but if someone is phenomenologically skilled (into
meditation, spirituality, magic, etc.), in some literal sense a finer grain will get through people’s filters and affect
them in ways that are too articulated for the average person’s system to manipulate and fix or much more likely at least
“encyst”.

4) Some people claim special knowledge or authority about truth, goodness, power, sex, intimacy, connection, minds. And
those claims might not be legitimate, but if the other person’s system believes them that makes it much more likely
transmission will occur.

5) Finally, that seeming special knowledge about truth, goodness, power, meaning, etc., will in some way be instantiated
in that person’s mind, but will usually be in some ways perverted, warped, or incomplete (even if seemingly clear,
persuasive, attractive, and valuable). And prolonged contact with such a person can have a whole-mind warping effect,
which would not be the case for someone who hadn’t developed such coherent-yet-still-perverse views.

6) FInally, some people are particularly schizoid or exquisitely walled off from the effects of sensations, somehow
managing sensations such that they flow through a keyhole in order to preserve a fantasy reality of control,
megalomania, (terror, fear), etc., sometimes hidden even from themselves. They might seem somewhat normal, if otherwise
charismatic and/or creepy, but their minds will be arranged in a way that makes it very, very, very hard for them to
responsively learn and grow, to understand the harm they’re causing and to all-the-way-down care about not hurting
people or to realize, all the way down, that they’re even hurting people at all.

So charismatic cult leaders, or whatever, really are doing something especially bad.

If:

you find yourself tongue-tied, stupified, unable to argue with someone. And they’re charismatic.

And/or they make you feel sometimes incredibly good and sometimes worthless, like you and your entire life and anything
you’ve ever done or will ever do again is worthless. Or that they are the only way to get X.

And if you do manage to argue, and they even don’t dismiss what you said, and even say it back to you in almost your own
words, and it seems like they’re being reasonable, and something wrong still happens, you lose track of what you were
going to say, or your “words get damaged,” and you still find yourself tongue-tied, stupified, or ultimately unable to
argue with someone.

Then, they might be a “cult leader.”

They might have a magnetic pull on a person’s entire mind/belief/representational/behavioral system that causes a person
to start layering. This might produce value in some ways but also produces a net global cost for that person’s system
(usually). Prolonged contact might mean years of cleanup and significantly increased self-transformation timelines.

The will present themselves (overtly or subtly) as having extremely rare, or unique, critically valuable special
knowledge, but, usually it’s a lie or it’s not worth it because it’s mixed with poison and detoxing before consuming is
prohibitively costly.

A good self-transformation technique will typically endogenously generate sufficient value such that subtly and overtly
authoritarian and coercive individuals can be in some sense ignored, at least for the purposes of acquiring the most
precious things.

(Such individuals will claim to have such techniques, and will dribble out some initial value, but engaging in such
techniques will likely ultimately be damaging and counterproductive. If you decide to collect “pieces” from such people,
beware. Sometimes they will have stumbled on a special, rare thing. But it will be perverted in some way and will come
at a price.)

It’s hard to overstate how much such an individual, one who, deep down, is relentlessly determined to control you and
have you be a certain way, whether they realize it or not, can fuck up your life before you’ve realized it’s happened.
Ten minutes with an individual like this can, worst-case, can mean hundreds of hours, or longer, to unfuck yourself.


part X: spotting a cult leader by overt signs:

Because the subtle signs are harder to detect and sometimes can’t be detected immediately, here is an incomplete list of
overt signs that you’re possibly in the presence of a cult leader:

(*) […] (*) noticing you’re holding your body very still (*) muscle tension, tension muscles in stomach, shoulders, neck
(*) finding yourself barely breathing (*) tingling buzzing shimmering anywhere in body (*) noticing you’re getting
sleepy or “stupid” (*) not being able to articulate something you can easily or could easily articulate in other
environments, becoming tongue-tied (*) feeling fear, anxiety, love, sexual arousal, acceptance, belonging, power,
“elitism,” or “having arrived” with no discernable cause or it’s sudden or there’s something intuitively strange-feeling
about it (*) environment where there are “right answers” and “wrong answers,” in actuality, even if lip-service has been
given to inclusivity or (provisional) openmindedness (*) environment arranged for e.g. high-stakes or fast responses,
that in order to “get the right answer” you have to not just act but also think and feel a particular way. (*) narrow
interaction patterns—can only interact with them in a certain way because if don’t then they won’t engage or don’t even
seem to understand (*) things that they say are wrong, according to them, are all wrong and completely dismissed, can’t
find partial value in things or evaluate things with nuance. (*) if the good sides of other teachers or teachings are
considered, it’s mere lip service and subtle body language or even subtler things is dismissing those teachers or
teachings whole-cloth and also dismissing you for even considering their value (*) body language or tone implying you’re
not even wrong, that your question, consideration, position has no value and that you don’t have any value. (*) they
imply other teachings, other goals, other plans, other groups have no value (*) if “caught out” or forced somehow to
interact outside of their normal,narrow window they might become very anxious or very angry (*) holding up very narrow
patterns of behavior (like particular types or styles of interactions) as universally good and that all other
interaction styles are bad (*) in general they’ve created a “closed universe” around themselves where only a very narrow
range of things can happen, even if a small number of those things are cool, impressive, or in some way world-facing.
(*) interacting with them will have a “hermetically sealed” quality, where they’ll have an immediate “cached” or “cued
up” answer to every possible concern, objection, accusation, etc. You’ll know it’s cached because of the speed of the
response as well as the ways it doesn’t quite address the issue raised but seems to talk past it or not consider it
freshly. (*) interacting with them will have a “never quite reaches them” feel, in that, even if your position is
restated by them, it will be a “frankencreation” in their own concepts or their own perspective and your actual position
will be discarded or dismissed by them. You’ll know this by how their restatement seems to “do harm” to your position
makes it less accessible to you. (*) acting like their “logical” arguments are complete, closed, timeless, eternnal,
acontextual, true everywhere, final, and dominating. playing with definitions of words or philosophical ideas in order
to win an argument. becoming extremely abstract or meta—needing to hairsplit premises as a way to win an argument.
needing to win all arguments or to dismiss the other position is not even wrong or not worth engaging in. (*) takes
advantage of “good-faith, good-will to resolve disagreements to get to the bottom of things,” takes advantage of
“mutual” understanding as a way to get more airtime and sink hooks in, with no intention or even necessarily ability to
understand or gain insight from your position, perspective, feelings, etc. (*) the person has created carefully
structured or cultivated groups, organizations, etc. in an attempt to have people behave in a very specific way (because
they really need people to interact in a very specific way or they need the world to work in a very specific way, and
this is their starting point or safe haven) (*) in general any hint of rigidity in behavior or what can happen around
them or black-and-white-ness or foreclosing or shutting down the behavior of others is at least a yellow flag. If they
want a particular type of interaction that can be ok, but if it seems like they can’t handle something else even for a
second or they’re white-knuckling or teeth-gritting through part of something until they can get the thing they want,
that’s a yellow flag. (*) particular advocacy for the world being unsafe or bad: doom, apocalypse, collapse, etc.
[That’s not to say such things might or might not be true, but claims of their truth are part of a lever to control
other’s behavior.] (*) they speak of elements of human interaction like they're "tools" or "toolkits" [cf.
"tool-ification"*]; they turn human relating into checklists, flowcharts, actions and responses. and, some people have
the tools, or know how to use the tools, and some people don't. (*) they tell you about yourself, they make a "package"
[cf. "packaging"] of it, they say "this is you, and this is how you work, and this is what you're experience is and what
it means," in words/ideas/concepts that make you doubt the legitimacy/safety/goodness/poewr of your own ongoing
experience and active self-care, and your interpretation of that experience and active self-care (*) they claim the
presence of unseen/unfelt forces/happenings/causes/effects, and you feel pressure to acquiesce to their claims or to
their ontology, or that there's no "surface," space, time abundance, safety, something to question their claims,
directly to them, or to other people (*) […]

See also:

Amor, Aleaxandra. Cult, A Love Story: Ten Years Inside a Canadian Cult and the Subsequent Long Road of Recovery. Fat
Head Publishing, 2013.

*"tool-ification" is someone else's term, and I might not be using it correctly


part X: incomplete list of relatively succinct concepts/definitions

Of course there’s many ways to use the words below! The defintions given are partial, flawed, and idiosyncratic.

misleadingness -

It can be helpful to remember that someone can be misleading or deceptive without lying. They might very carefully only
say things that are true (“selective-truthing”). They might very carefully only say things that aren’t quite relevant.
They might say things in response to questions that aren’t actually answers to the questions asked. They might give
special, private meanings to words and phrases that they can sufficiently defend at a later time as being what they
really meant. They might say ambiguous things that can mean both something and it’s opposite, depending on later events
or later clarification.


authoritarianism -

“the enforcement or advocacy of strict obedience to authority at the expense of personal freedom” [according to google]

Such advocacy, as mentioned above, can be both explicit and implicit. If explicit, there might be reasons given. If
implicit, behavior will be presumptive. Reasons might involve appeals to the greater good or the need to make hard
tradeoffs or for the (necessity of the) prevention of something highlighted as bad, either imminently or inevitably in
the far future. Many other reasons and arguments can be given. Also: tragedy of the commons, volunteer’s dilemma, threat
of anarchy or dog eat dog or inefficiency or…

One possible way to dissolve the seeming need for a blanket ideology involving overt or covert authoritarianism might be
to get very concrete about “what would actually happen” in various particular, realistic scenarios, involving specific
people, groups, or places.


coercion -

a person causing another person to unresponsively lock in stable or escalating patterms of mind or behavior, usually in
a way that has utility for the preson doing the causing.Iif a person is coerced, then that person will have resources
bound up in executing, elaborating upon, or being prepared to execute the mechanical behavior. The person will be less
creative, less generative, less able to flexibly use environmental opportunities to changes and grow, relative to the
degree they have been or are being coerced. [I threw this definition together, and there are cleaner, more
self-consistent ones out there.]

A related concept is the usual “learned helplessness,” where a person has now has new “waiting steps” such that they’re
dependent on occurences outside of themselves in order to move forward on various things.

This is one route that these sorts of things can be facilitated:
1. Demonstration of inadequacy, demonstrate a person is inadequate on some (possibly narrow) dimension. Do this be
   leading a person to a surprising, possibly negative result, with the implication they weren’t enough, that they were
   in error.
2. Demonstration of generality. Demonstrate to the person some degree of generalization, that this inadequacy more
   generally applies.
3. Hope for overgeneralization. Hope the person generalizes their inadequacy as much as possible.
4. Demonstation of non-self-bootstrapping. Ideally-perversely, repeat steps 1-3, starting with some narrow demonstration
   that the person can’t resolve (at least once aspect of the original inadequacy) and again ultimately hope that person
   overgeneralizes to “not being able to become able to help themselves,” on as many wanted dimensions as possible.


idolatry -

One might grant that goodness is objective, real, in some sense.

But, one might claim a fixed, “exteriorized” defintion for that good thing. “Goodness is X.” “Goodness is righ there.”
“Goodness is this.” “Goodness is in this.” “Goodness has object-ness or thing-ness.”

A possible correction is to consider that irrespective of any objective dimensions of goodness, it still must be
subjectively, fluidly found, by route of a personal, unfixed path. One could take this as provisional and explore, over
time, whether it has validity, including even the concept of “goodness” itself and/or the various/many senses that that
word might have, inclusive of related useful concepts/words/ideas, and so forth.


maximization -

appeals to or capitalization on insecurity or paranoia (“never enough”) by evoking ideas, images, or promises of
“infinity,” “hugeness,” “foreverness,” “everythingness,” “all of it,” etc.” (as either carrot or stick)

pascal’s mugging (idiosyncratic interpretation) -

“I (may have) rare or unique things/goods of great value that you won’t be able to get anywhere else, ever, forever, if
you don’t stick around or do as I say.”


stipulation -

Stipulation is very useful tool when playing with arguments, thought experiments, and ideas. (“Stipulate, let, grant,
given, say…”) Here, I mean something more narrow.

There’s a pattern where someone will offer reasonable assumptions, and then narrowly follow the implications of those
assumptions, while implicitly denying that any other reasonable assumptions are possible or that there’s even
potentially another, better activity to be doing at all.

For example, one might say, “The world consists of agents who have goals.” A bunch of implications would follow from
that, and it seems reasonable as a starting point for discussion. But what of resources, nature, the material versus
procedural nature of those goals, the implications for whether those agents have experiences or not, and the relevance
of that or not, in the discussion, and so forth. (not to mention, for this example, considering e.g. humans to be agents
who have collections of goals gets philosophically problematic very quickly, but, again, can be stonewalled or
gaslighted as the only reasonable starting point for a large class of communicative contexts)

Besides “stipulation,” other words for this might be “frame control,” “schematic dominance,” “framing,” “out of sight
out of mind,” “what you see is all this is…”

An extreme version of this is foundationalism, according to wikipedia: “Foundationalism concerns philosophical theories
of knowledge resting upon justified belief, or some secure foundation of certainty such as a conclusion inferred from a
basis of sound premises.” This is a very useful frame! But engagement with explicit premises as an activity as such is
not the only way to interact or to seek truth or goodness or etc. And/but, the implication might be that any other
activity is worthless, dangerous, immature, etc.

Stipulations can build up in the environment, can become implicit, omnipresent, and also interjective—it might become a
norm that some people can add new stipulations at any time (whenever it’s convenient for them) and other’s can’t. And
this is way to control discourse and behavior.

Another thing that can happen is “matching,” where people’s perceptions and behavior tend to gel around explicat
assertory statements, cf confirmation bias and/but with respect to behavior and perception as well.


more -

This list and the entries under each current item are very incomplete!


part X: teachers and leader timelines:

Timelines are very long. Meditative practice can take thousands of hours to make substantial progress. Real progress is
“de-layering,” but many seemingly good practices and produce a combination of layering and de-layering.

Even “fully de-layering” is insufficient because a person must also acquire lots of real-world knowledge about how to be
good and safe for other people. And that real-world knowledge has to be “propagated throughout the system.”

Becoming good, safe, and effective is a life-long journey.

If a teacher is doing something weird, it’s usually the case that they have a blindspot or hangup. It’s unlikely that
they’re playing n-dimensional chess.

Good teachers can still have buried malevolence and sex stuff that even they aren’t aware of. Unburying and working
through all of it will typically take someone thousands and thousands of hours, even if they have a practice that is
doing very little initial layering.

But, “asymptotic perfection” is something good teachers and any serious practioner should be aspiring to, in my opinion.

Mistakes, blindspots, and fuckups should be expected, though. And if someone is doing something weird, that you’re
vulnerable to, you might want to check back with them every few years instead of sticking with them and experiencing
quite a bit of harm, before you realize it, that you ultimately have to undo to make further progress.


part X: layer theory and high-level principles of ethical, nonharmful, noncoercive, safe interaction:

Generally but not universally, de-layering, or at least not adding layering, is good. Layering is still good as a
stopgap, when things are happening too surprisingly, too fast, or in some other unhandleable way, for a particular
person.

Remember, layering begets more layering, and, the more layering a person has, the harder it is for that person to make
further valued changes to their mind/self/behavior/etc., all things being equal. De-layering creates more optionaity for
change, and faster change, all things being equal.

If a person is short-term “forcing themselves into a shape” or “trying to be or act in a particular way,” at the expense
of long-term growth, then that is, more or less by definition, layering.

The more a person can “just be themselves” around you, the less likely it is that they will be layering around you or
layering in preparation for interacting with you. This is not universally true—a person can, for example, be layering
all the time (almost everyone is, in some way), or layering before interaction with anyone, not just you, and so on. So,
trying to have it be that a person can let their guard down around you, be unreflective around you, etc., will usually
be at least neutral for them, relative to their baseline, and possibly good for them. One could describe this as a
“low-stakes” interaction or a “safe” interaction.

There is a failure mode to the above, which is you overtly or explicitly communicating that you are safe or being
seemingly safe, but, actually you are being unsafe because of subtle or overt coercive effects.

In subtle ways, you might be wishing (or “needing”) that they would change their behavior, either in interaction with
you or in other contexts, and that could subtly bleed through.

You might not even be aware of that wishing or needing, but if it’s safe for them to tell you that they’re experiencing
it, then that’s really good. If you are aware of it, then, sometimes, often, it’s better to call it out, to explicitly
note the problematic things that you’re doing, to create mutual knowledge. Sometimes, after that mutual knowledge is
estabilshed, then it’s better to just end that particular interaction.

Talking about “truth” and “goodness,” as such, can sometimes feel like the implication that the person needs to “change
now” or “be different now.” Any model or ideal or goal or concept or principle, etc., can be used as a hammer, and might
be, even if a person disendorses doing so to themselves.

This can be less likely to happen if the interaction is truly low-stakes.

Interactions can become high-stakes when one person has something rare, hard-to-get, unique, and valuable or even
perceived to be critically good or necessary by the other person. Then that other person is especially likely to try to
be a particular way to get that value.

A situation can be made more low-stakes for that other person by good-faith and competently trying to either get that
person that thing, or to show them how they can get it themselves, or to show them that it’s not actually valuable or
real, or to show them that they are mistaken about its rarity or difficult-to-get-ness, and so on.

The more you can obviate yourself in the other person acquiring value, then the more low-stakes the interaction is.

Low-stakes interactions are more likely to be creative, in that both people can work together to do something even
better for each other, and everyone, than they could alone.

There are of course issues of low resources (time, money, etc.), coordination costs, entrenched beliefs or
preconceptions, excessive ill-will, preconceptions, etc., that it make it hard to have noncoervice, low-stakes, and
creative interactions with another person. Sometimes, often, it can require tremendous preparation, over years and
years, to arrange self and world to interact with other people noncoercively. But you can do your best, wherever you are
on that journey, and it’s worth it.

One final pithy thing, if you’re looking for a quick-and-dirty way to try to know whether you’re being coercive versus,
say ethically persuading, is you can ask, whether, functionally, you are *influencing* a person or *informing* them. Of
course, seeming informing can actually be influencing, and vice versa. But I have found it helpful to check whether I’m
influencing (bad, in this usage) or merely information (good, in this usage). If you *need* a person to respond in a
particular way then there’s a real, stringent sense in which you cannot ethically interact with them, at least along
that dimension, and more work is required on your part. If you have optionality, power, freedom with respect to X (or
they do, or you both do) then the interaction becomes ethical with respect to X. Sometimes this can happen upstream or
obliquely. For example, if both people have lots of money or other resources, then there’s less of a surface area, very
generally, for either person to “coercively need” each other.

Of course, it’s nice to be needed, or is it? It’s maybe safer to be needed, in the short term. But true safety likely
comes from flexible, creative interdependence, trust and reliance and skill versus brittle, inflexible (i.e. layered!)
coercion.

Other people’s intelligence, skill, compassion, and love keep us safe, not them being forced into a narrow range of
behaviors around you. Of course, people can locally disagree about what’s safe and good, and people can not realize how
they’re being harmful, and people can be manufacturing victimhood or engaging in net-destructive self-healing
strategies, and so on. So, ideally, as many people as possible are collaboratively and synergistically engaging in
effective self-transformative practice and resource acquisition and distribution, etc.

In any case, if someone doesn’t need to layer in your presense, then they can grow in your presence. And, if this is
mutual, then you can grow together.


part X: it’s not cool:


It’s best to consider the powers, the siddhis, the effects as not cool. They can become a thing in communities of
practice. And they can become an ugly, escalatory, ruinous thing between practitioners. One or both people can do
disendorsed, yet still hate-filled, tremendous harm to the other or to people caught in the crossfire.

(This is a bit of an overgeneralization, but: People uncontrollably (or deliberately) reach for the powers when they
have social skill deficits, or they’re very afraid, or deep-down they’re resigned and feel helpless and hopeless.
Otherwise, they would have already backchained to something collaborative and onstructive, both non-verbally
smooth/friendly and explicitly clear, and they likely wouldn’t have found themselves in the triggering situation in the
first place.)

If something especially subtly weird is going on, there is minimal to be gained from toughing it out, being seen as
strong, by self or others.

And it can be very counterproductive to try to early-on become “invulnerable” to subtle interaction effects. (One is
always vulnerable in the sense that we are bathed in it all the time, all things being equal. We can however transcend
it, have unconfused, good information processing around it, to let it flow through us as “just information,” “just
background,” etc.) Done too early, before enough meditative skill, trying to become “invulnerable” will produce
additional layering, increase timelines, and not do much for becoming less vulnerable.

If negative effects are detected, try to separate early and often. Try to reduce incentives for unnecessary interaction
(e.g. record talks or publish summaries so not everyone needs to be present).

Try not to hold grudges as this can increase meditation timelines. But, so too, if you are feeling strong negative
emotions towards someone, don’t self-gaslight yourself into believing you’re not or that you shouldn’t.

And, you can just leave. You can find meaning elsewhere. You don’t need what they’re selling if it’s a group situation.


part X: the quiet interaction and beauty of subtle interpersonal effects:

(You may wish to read “part X: the late-stage meditator in community” before this section if you’re skipping around.)

Over time, interactions between two trained individuals or one highly trained individual and other untrained individuals
become relatively gentle and quiet, noncoercive, barely there. Interaction effects gently and liminally enhance
intimacy, connection, etc.

(Remember, you’ll always be bathed in the stuff, all the time. But it becomes information instead of influence.)

Brave individuals might use intense interaction effects for training purposes, relating purposes, sexual purposes, etc.
All is permitted, as it were. But I imagine most people will have no need or desire for such things, whether they’re
leading quiet lives or doing big things, or doing both.

Sometimes, not all of the time, you can just walk away from shit like this.

All that said, sometimes communities become infected, and then one must engage with all this stuff in order to protect
the community from the worst of what’s described above (harm to individuals or community dissolution). A community can
need boundaries and sometimes “sterilization” or “clean room” approaches. That is, some communities may need skilled
shamans*, some of the time.

But if a community hasn’t been “de-layered, de-compensated, cracked open” and there currently aren’t any “dark wizards”
in or on the edges of the community, then it’s probably best to leave things well alone. Group practices** that can
influence the boundaries between people should be used very sparingly and carefully. They are not games and even
sporadic experimentation can have consequences. See the Many Protocol in this document. The Many Protocol should
possibly only be explored when there is at least one highly-skilled practioner in the group (thousands of hours of
effective practice).

*Stephan, V. Singing to the plants: A guide to mestizo shamanism in the upper Amazon. UNM Press, 2010.

**Katz, Richard. Boiling energy: Community healing among the Kalahari Kung. harvard university Press, 1982.


part X: depth of horror:

Horrible things have happened to individuals, often in childhood. Violent abuse, sexual abuse, neglect, extreme
coercion. There is religious terror around hells, devils, demons. Terrible things happen to parents and grandparents,
too, and that will affect the kids. There is also medical and death horror, we see relatives suffer and die in front of
us or we walk in on dead bodies. Even if onself or relatives ultimately survive it can still be very tulmultuous. And
there is cultural horror—slavery, extreme racism and bigotry, colonization, imperialism, genocides, holocausts, world
wars, ancient curses, ancient gods, etc. All of this is rattling around in people’s minds and between minds, brought
forwards through the centuries and decades. The skilled meditator will systematically work through all of this and their
own stuff, over time. But there’s a lot and it takes a long time. In the meantime, one is exposed to it, in the water,
as it were. And if something gets decompensated, cracked open in a group environment, then it can cause problems for
multiple people.


part X: inappropriate reification:

Remember all the above is just a theory of convenience, a story. Find your own truth. Don’t inappropriately reify any of
this or take my word for it. Good science is still true. Planes still fly. Government still do the thing they do.
Computers compute. Stuff that’s true is simultaneously true. Give yourself time to integrate new, surprising stuff into
a unified worldview. It will take some time.



creativity:

What might (and could) we do together that’s better (more good), for everyone, than what we might do apart? What might
we do together that’s better than what we might do apart? What might we do together that’s better than what we’ll do
apart?



the creativity of evil:

(#) Unfortunate sequences of events produce ignorance, inability, fear, and (perceived or actual) resource contsraints.
(#) Ignorance, inability, fear and (perceived or actual) resource contsraints produce myopic, selfish desperation (that
can skillfully hide for a long time from itself and from others). (#) Myopic, selfish desperation can be extremely
generative and can produce tremendous value. (#) That value production usually comes with spreading, lasting collateral
harm (e.g. overt or covert authoritarianism, self-coercion, etc.). (#) And, that (sometimes tremendous) value produced
will have poisonous, toxic components woven deeply into it, usually to the very core, that in some way hurts everything
it touches, even as it also can do good things. (#) Sometimes, evil can self-transcend, de-toxify itself, repair the
harm it caused, and provide acceptable restitution and reparation. (#) Sometime, two or more evils can come together to
mutually de-toxify. (#) Sometimes, one or more people from the outside can extract value from poison, without being
destroyed, and can ultimately provide and share wisdom and healing that wouldn’t have been possible before. (#) Evil is
real; it incidentally destroys goodness or directly tries to destroy goodness (and sometimes succeeds). (#) Evil is
illusory; In its place is myopic, selfish desperation that would be (safe and) good, instantly, if it knew how. (#) It
will ok in the end. If it’s not ok, then it’s not the end.



joy:

safety = resolution of problems + mind autonomy safety + creativity = joy


lineages and transformative works:

There’s the Silicon Valley bromide, “A’s hire A’s; B’s hire C’s.” So there’s this awareness of entropy or degradation or
something.

There’s a joke about how philosophers or academics in general produce “lesser clones” of themselves.

There’s a big deal, I think, in artificial intelligence around “artificial bootstrapping,” as in, if and how and when is
it possible to make something better in some way than its originator.

I think, generally, in the self-help world, an academic or a sharp independent will create a technique, and then people
will popularize it. Sometimes the popularization will be recognizable as the original or the original will even be
referred to. Sometimes it’s called by the same name, and sometimes this is endorsed by the originator.

And, other times, the popularization will have its provenance obfuscated. The popularizer will call everything by
different names, usually water the thing down, make it much easier for people to grasp.

Sometimes this will even be an improvement, but, I think, also, sometimes nuance will be left out that means that people
that encounter it won’t be able to use that instantiation to “go all the way” with the material. This can still be a net
win if the user would never have known about the existence of the original material or they wouldn’t have had an on-ramp
to unlock the original material.

But, sometimes, a couple worse things can happen. First, people can encounter the watered-down version and then think
that the original version must be likewise deficient, even though they don’t carefully investigate the encountered
original. (They might not know that it’s the *original gold standard,* or whatever.) Another thing that can happen is
that no one will want to invest in the original creator popularizing their work, when they eventually want to get around
to it, because “it’s already been done.” I vaguely remember at least one concrete case of this.

The above paragraph is sort of looking at potentially bad outcomes at the level of individuals, consumers and the
original creators. There’s system-wide potential negative effects, too:

This happens to some extent in academic science, there’s a proliferation of low-quality papers (this is due to possibly
too much funding as well as perverse incentives and metrics). And, skilled researchers can identify quality lines of
work and build on those, but less skilled researchers and scientists in adjacent communties have a much harder time
weeding through all the crap. This might be isomorphic to the idea of a market for lemons, which is a notable economics
paper. If I recall correctly, in a market for lemons (as in lemon cars versus cherry cars?), there’s no way to tell
which are the lemons and which are the cherries (back in the day), and so there was no incentive to sell cherries, and
the average quality of used car was very low. (I’m probably getting something wrong, here.)

Transferring this over to meditation-land. If there’s too many techniques to try because of low-quality and even
well-intentioned popularizers and teachers, and say a person can’t efficiently weed through techniques until they find
quality ones, because, for that person, it takes too long to know whether a technique is working or not—they might just
not try to engage with meditation techniques at all.

At think wisdom traditions, meditation lineages partially solve this by investing a lot of resources into a small number
of people and authorizing some of them to teach and appointing one as a successor.

This helps with succession and quality maintenance but is still vulnerable. It’s hard to be invulnerable to quality
degradation. (Sometimes synthesizers or revivalists [or popularizers who choose wisely!] figure out or semi-invent
things that are as good or better than the originals, at least along some dimensions.) People from the outside still
have to figure out which lineages are actually good, and so there’s still a market for lemons problem, even if the
lineage itself is doing an ok job of maintaining quality. And there’s the scaling problem.

Even though science has its issues, it’s partially solved some of these kinds of problems, at scale, with with good
feedback loops “truth”, empiricism, explicitness, etc. Again there’s a proliferation of low-quality papers. And, I think
we’ve lost a good deal of our ability to train skilled scientists. But something was working ok for a while, and we’re
still limping along, and science and technology are still progressing. (I’m ignoring the moral angle as well as
opportunity costs, what could have been, in some neighboring world, here.)

One can do a similar thing with self-improvement and meditation techniques. That is, while meditation traditions have
texts, there’s often secret knowledge, or keys to unlocking those texts, that could only be gotten in person. (Sometimes
people can bootstrap, one way or another, into unlocking texts without forming an intense relationship with a teacher.)

That similar thing is to write better meditation manuals, and to keep improving them. Make them comprehensively explicit
and conceptually clear. (My material has a long way to go, but it’s arguably pretty good. It seems like people do best
when they’ve had some prior contact with other meditation techniques, and often it takes at least a tiny bit of
question-answering with me, but some fraction of people on-ramp pretty quickly. And it’s my hope that skilled people
will be able to de novo bootstrap with my material even if they have no contact with anyone who’s used it before, say if
they find it on the internet somewhere.

There’s still all sorts of dangers, here. It’s a trope of people destroying themselves with found texts and people
mistintpreting texts or teachers, going too far too fast or perversely misterpreting, becoming dark wizards, cult
leaders, arch nemeses, and so forth.

But there’s something better, sometimes, about freely available, explicit meditation manuals versus esoteric knowledge
mostly locked up in people. (Back in the day, by being esoteric, that’s how some traditions survived, I assume, making
it possible for as to know about them and build on them. They kept the knowledge rare and valuable, so they could eat
and keep the thing going. Hard problems, here. It sometimes also avoided the dangers in the above paragraph, probably,
but the tropes still exist for a reason.)

In any case, I worry that my material will be cleaned up and popularized in a way that both dilutes it and actually
harms dissemination, breadth and depth, for some of the reasons above.

More to say, and more to come, I suppose.

It’s partially hard because I want people to take apart the material and rewrite it, because that’s a good way to learn,
maybe the best way to learn. And I do want people to improve on the material, to the point that it becomes
unrecognizable, in part because it’s better that way or just that it’s equally good (or whatever) but the new language
speaks better to a different group of people.

Often when people recreate something, they get it working just enough for themselves, whether they realize that’s what
they’ve done or not, and they distribute it anyway, and this contributes to noise in the system, lemon markets, people
thinking they’ve already seen better thing but it’s not worth it, and so on. (I think something like this happens in
open source software, for some language and some domains. Also the forking, which is sometimes critically excellent and
sometimes divisive, resource-draining, and community-killing.)

So I guess I’m asking something like, if you lightly reshape the material, link back to my thing. If you heavily reshape
the material, either make it so unrecognizable (if that’s natural) that’s there’s sort of no brand or community overlap,
as it were, so that more and more people can be reached without instead just confusing people. And, in any case, try to
make it excellent, try to make it so that it takes people all they way from many, many, many different starting points.
Make it as excellent, effective, and comprehensive as you can, and powerful enough to take many different people at
different starting points absolutely all the way.

It’s my hope that we can make it really obvious who’s stuff is good, somehow cutting through all the noise. And then we
link all the good stuff to all the other good stuff, and then people can choose from superb protocols that meet them
exactly where they’re at. And somehow there’s just enough choice to benefit people, and low enough proliferation that
there’s a very high signal-to-noise ratio.

This is a theoretical-technical-empirical problem—makes the instructions interpretable and excellent. And partially a
sociological problem—guard the community from entropy and noise. And those two problems are interrelated.

Let’s try to have the right thing happen, and I also hope that my writing this doesn’t have a chilling effect, somehow.
Let’s do the best we can to get supremely excellent material safely into as many hands as possible.

Maybe it’ll be a long time before people’s work diverges and competes with mine (in a good(!) way or a bad(!) way or
both). Or maybe it’s coming up fast. Unclear, at the time of this writing.

See also, if twitter still exists when you’re reading this: https://twitter.com/swardley/status/1200193566749921280

Well, he probably wouldn’t mind if I just pasted it here:

Thread See new Tweets Conversation Simon Wardley #EEA #Labour @swardley Me : Gosh, your work is truly amazing. X :
Thanks. I'd like to make it more widespread like your mapping. Me : That's easy. Just make it open, creative commons.
People will ignore for years but don't worry. X : What if someone steals it. Me : They can't steal what you give away.
5:23 PM · Nov 28, 2019·TweetDeck 18 Retweets 70 Likes Simon Wardley #EEA #Labour @swardley · 22h Replying to @swardley
X : But wha if someone else makes money with it? Me : That's good news. The more the better. You're trying to create a
community, a space for your work to exist in. Do you seek irrelevance? X : No Me : Then open it up. Simon Wardley #EEA
#Labour @swardley · 22h X : Can't I get some VC to sponsor or invest in me? Me : You're more likely to get someone with
capital to steal your idea, cut yourself out of a market and never expand it. Entire markets are lost over legal
squabbles and attempts to "own" stuff ... see Unix. Simon Wardley #EEA #Labour @swardley · 22h X : I wasn't around at
that time. Me : Oh, no problem. The entire future of the operating system was lost by a bunch of squabbling execs backed
up by over enthusiastic lawyers, none of which could spell strategy let alone play it. This is a common story throughout
history. Simon Wardley #EEA #Labour @swardley · 22h ... into the mix, an "unruly" individual played an open source hand
and asked for help. It was mostly laughed at, dismissed as lacking any business acumen and then won the world. It's
another reasonably common story. Simon Wardley #EEA #Labour @swardley · 22h X : Reasonably? Me : Yes ... an open play
doesn't exempt people from making utterly daft mistakes. See OpenStack and differentiation on APIs with AWS. Simon
Wardley #EEA #Labour @swardley · 22h X : I'm nervous about this. Me : Well, that's a good sign. The numero uno of daft
moves is to open by default. You're struggling with this question which means you're on the open by thinking path. Even
my opening of mapping all those years ago had a plan but no guarantees



practice preliminaries:



timeline, mindset, trajectory, harm:

I’ve rewritten the below a few times. It still feels like a very early draft, and it could be rewritten one hundred more
times.


raw hours:

So there’s this partially open-ended thing that you can do with the bodymind. And it takes time, thousands of hours.
There’s a part that can’t be compressed, sort of the raw thing you’re working with, the way your mind *is,* right now,
in all its complexity, that has to be worked all the way through. And then there will be contingent things that will
make all of that go faster or slower.

If someone is older, they’ll have more raw stuff to work through. [The following sentence is long and hard to parse, and
I apologize.] I suspect, for, say, someone who’s, I don’t know, between eighteen and thirty years old, with no really
perverse trauma that can confusingly mix good and bad together, for example childhood sexual abuse, who’s really good
with working with documents and a teacher, *maybe* they could start to asymptote around 2000-3000 hours. Maybe. There
are still unknowns, here. I suspect something more realistic, for someone between eighteen and forty-five, is anywhere
from 4000-10,000 hours.

Every problem you encounter may seem like it’s the deepest last problem. But there will be another, and another, maybe
with a delay but inevitably, until there isn’t. So plan for this, in resources (time, money, relationships), possible
break-taking (to make money or friends), opportunity costs, etc. One can’t predict using timelines, or plan using
timelines—one has to just assume it’s going to take 10 years 20 years even if it only takes 1.7 years. This can
potentially be hard and risky, depending on available resources and opportunity costs, and likely or possible sequelae.
This paragraph will be at the end of the next section as well.


better to finish, and smoothly:

One of the things that’s hard is that, I suspect, for most people, doing the thing will either consume their lives or
they’ll get stuck. There’s the saying, “Better not to start. If you start, better to finish.”

Some people will try to fit all this into the way their life currently is, their job, their relationships. That might
work, meditating one to three hours per day, with more on the weekends, and intensely a few times per year. (But, again,
see above how long that’ll take, calendar time, given the raw number of hours needed to asymptote.) One possible outcome
of this is that they won’t notice many things changing. And that’s a safe tolerable outcome. But, if that person gets
into some hard stuff, they might not have the “habitual intensity” to get themselves out. And they may get stuck in a
state that’s hurting themselves, people they care about, and possibly many people that they incidentally come into
contact with in their daily lives.

So there’s a certain safety in “really committing.” You *don’t* have to do that in the beginning. You *can* ramp up
slowly over six to twenty-four months, maybe, to see if you really want to do this thing. Maybe. We don’t have enough
data, yet. This section will change as that data comes in. Be very careful about experimenting, to figure out whether
you’re in or you’re out. Don’t accidentally get too far. It happens.

An important part of the that “really committing” is not just knowing that you’re going to put in a lot of hours. That
other part is something like “cognitive burden” or “cognitive momentum.” It often or even usually won’t look like normal
“figuring things out,” though it very well might, but your mind is going to be occupied solving problems of types its
never, ever had to solve before. And, to make progress, this is sometimes going to be going on “in the back of your
mind” when you’d potentially rather be, say, making money or enjoying or strengthening relationships. One person
described it to be as “whole self demanding” as another full time job or another primary relationship. So, even if one
doesn’t meditate for three days or something, that “job-ness” or “relationship-ness” in terms of how the mind is
processing beneath the surface (or not) doesn’t go away.

A few paragraphs above, I mentioned, “they may get stuck in a state that’s hurting themselves, people they care about,
and possibly many people that they incidentally come into contact with in their daily lives.” Being “really committed”
also involves trying to have life flexibility to sometimes dial the intensity up even more, to move through harmful
states faster or more smoothly. Other sections will talk a bit more specifically about the possible harms to oneself and
other people. But, if something like that is going on, one wants to be able to ideally isolate themselves for as many
hours or days is necessary to get to something better. That’s going to put a strain on relationships, depending on how
complete that isolation should be. It’s better to have kids after one or both people get on the likely far side of all
of that.

This paragraph is in the section above, too: Every problem you encounter may seem like it’s the deepest last problem.
But there will be another, and another, maybe with a delay but inevitably, until there isn’t. So plan for this, in
resources (time, money, relationships), possible break-taking (to make money or friends), opportunity costs, etc. One
can’t predict using timelines, or plan using timelines—one has to just assume it’s going to take 10 years 20 years even
if it only takes 1.7 years. This can potentially be hard and risky, depending on available resources and opportunity
costs, and likely or possible sequelae.


a failure mode:

I’ve talked above about “intensity” and “really committing,” but this can lead people into a very common failure mode.
So this might be one of the most important subsections you’ll read in this entire document.

When people first start using this material, they might do a thing that could be called any of the things below:

magical button-pushing excessive-faith meditation superstitious meditation “meditate-and-pray”

What these mean, and they all refer to the same thing, is to sort of be doing one’s best to follow the instructions
maybe to the letter, but not trying to understand and enact the instructions to their very essence or core. Even if one
is using the meta protocol, and the meta meta protocol, one can still be doing something like this.

It’s better to maybe pretend that the instructions are complete shit, a lossy telephone game, that’s pointing at a real
thing (or is it), but something got hopelessly garbled. And, you want the value, but you should then interact with the
instructions with the intention to find “the real instructions behind the instructions.” This isn’t a new idea. But,
even where some parts of this document are vague, some parts are crystal clear (in some sense), albeit hard to parse or
initially interpret. And that (arguable) clarity can make it seem like “all one has to do is follow the instructions,”
which just isn’t true.

I tell people they would ideally create their own instruction document, that leaves out none of the essential complexity
that this document is pointing to, but is entirely in their own words…

Without this section, I think the written instructions do eventually lead people to the “real instructions,” but
hopefully reading this will make that go faster.

I want to emphasize, though, that ALMOST EVERYONE inevitably starts with magical button-pushing. One shouldn’t be
ashamed of this. Some percentage of people just won’t be able to help themselves. Not-being-able-to-help-it, to not do
it, of course, is why we meditate in the first place. Finding one’s way to the real instructions, over tens or hundreds
of hours, is just part of the thing.

Be precise, patient, and gentle.


meditation is not strength-training:

[Originally published: https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2020/01/20/meditation-is-not-strength-training/ (Last
accessed: 2020-09-06)]

I think the repetition/strength-training/functional-reserve model of meditation is pretty misleading. The mind isn’t a
muscle. It’s better to think of it as a digital state machine that can self-modify its state transition function, even
though this borrows from the dubious computing metaphor. The mind is not analog and not mushy. It is shockingly digital
and lossless. Seeming muscle-ness is an abstraction on more fine-grain dynamics. To succeed, one must eventually engage
with those dynamics as they are (of course, but models matter). “Strength training” causes people to accumulate a great
deal of momentum and cruft that they then have to reverse and undo. I’ve heard stories of people who wish they’d had a
better sense of “right effort,” earlier on.* I personally think it’s better to think in terms of puzzle-solving,
test-check, and wayfinding right from the start.

An analogy I use is that the mind is made of a tangle of perfectly flexible, perfectly fluid steel cables that are also
perfectly incompressible and inelastic. Maybe like cooked spaghetti or heavy rope, but “indestructible” or
“unforgiving.” And you can reweave the cables but nothing can be created or destroyed. (This isn’t entirely true because
experience tangles in new cable(s) and correct reweavings cause cables to losslessly become one [“elegance collapse”].]
No escape but ultimately clear directionality in the space of play.

I think Donald Knuth has an essay somewhere about programming. And he makes an analogy that, when people first start
learning programming, they think it’s like drawing, where, if you push harder with the pencil you get a darker line. I
*think* the more recent idea of “programming by coincidence” is downstream of this essay. I don’t agree with everything
in the essay, if I remember it correctly, but some of the metaphorical/analogical distinctions are great.

Yes, experimenting, yes playing, yes *learning*. But not guessing and hoping, or doubling-down, over and over again!

To back off a little bit, there is something to the “train the microscope then use the microscope.” There is “gathering”
of content and method, over and over again. Behavior is, if not digital, then coherent–walking and talking and eating.
Some behaviors are digital-ish, like speaking or writing, though they are waves in a preconceptual/postconceptual ocean.
And/but/then/anyway it’s like the insights, the microscope(s), get perpetually rewoven through the entire system, while
the system retains something of their character. This isn’t quite right, but I think it’s better than the
strength-training analogy.

To back off a little bit more, I can imagine the strength-training analogy can be empowering and is a better model than
“hapless, hopeless prisoner/captive of one’s own uncontrollable mind”!

But mind as collaborative puzzle-solving coconspirator (albeit with potentially miles and miles of terrible, torturous,
self-reflexive, strange-loop confusion) might be better.

*Of the people in the wild who have succeeded or seem to be making inexorable progress, it does seem that “overshooting
and correcting” does work. And the more likely failure mode is “not reaching escape velocity.” But, I think explicit
wayfinding might be best thing. Not enough theory/data, yet. And, I don’t know how much selection bias is in my
(contemporary) “historical” data.


entrenchment and active occlusion (layering):

Along with “intensity” and “really commiting” and “magical button-pushing,” is sort of “creeping unreflective
desperation and unresponsiveness.” Often we start meditating because, whether we can put our finger on it or not,
something is terrible, horrific somewhere. There is something really, really, really, really bad. And, the first impulse
of the mind, in some sense, once the mind gets just enough knowledge to start making changes to itself, is to
reflexively, in some sense, run as far away from the bad thing as it possibly can.

And that running away, paradoxicaly, tragically is exactly the wrong thing that ultimately needs to happen. (That’s
often the case but not always. Sometimes the “running away” is the only way the mind can pick up tools to finally turn
around and come back.

In any case, whether it’s good or bad, that running away will sometimes freeze not just that deep dark bad thing (or,
usually, a bunch of deep, dark bad things) but will “freeze” a whole bunch of other things as well.

That is, a meditator can become more rigid, more neurotic, more belligerent, more unresponsive, more “unspiritual”
before things turn around. And some of that rigidity might not go away for until the meditator is close to the “very
end.” Or it’ll painfully come and go in ways that are distressing to both the meditator and the people around them,
hopes and expectations dashed, over and over again.

So, this section is both for caution and expectation setting but also to possibly make it a bit less likely that
something like this will happen. Judicious use of the meta protocol and the meta meta protocol will help.

Another way to look at all this is, at a very different level of abstraction, “don’t even try to make yourself a
certain, very specific way. And, even more so, don’t ever try to move forward without understanding why you’re not
already that way.” Beware, beware, “I *should* just be able to do X…”

Again, be precise, patient, and gentle.


extreme skill and extreme standards:

It can be helpful to realize that you need to become a genius. You need to become brilliant. You will become brilliant,
at least along some narrow dimensions, in the course of doing this thing. If you strive for that, relax into it, things
will go more smoothly.

The level of skill and (mostly implicit) intricate knowledge that you need to acquire is shockingly high. It’s like you
need to learn every single instrument in an entire orchestra, including the ones that, at least historically, very
rarely get used, as well as how to be a conductor. But that’s what the protocol is for. The protocol helps you do that.
But if you’re ready for that, you know what’s supposed to happen, then that can go more eaily.

Additionally, it can help to reach for words, phrases, and concepts like these:

comprehensiveness systematicity exhaustivity flawlessness perfection no shims, no patches, nothing left behind, no
subtle errors, no subtle jogs or discontinuities or shear no stuff hidden under apparent flawlessness or smoothness no
stable bypass, nothing left behind, no shortcuts

[And eventually you will let go of the above! Perfection-in-imperfection type stuff, aconceptual and post-conceptual
type stuff. Letting go of “done” and “done-ness” and “finished” and “end” and “completion,” etc.]

[No-goal, no-plan, no-view, no-position, no-escape, no-refuge, no-end, no-next, no-later, no-elsewhere, no-elsewhen,
no-success, no-failure, no-purpose, no-point, no-good[~], no-bad[~], no-evil, no-self, no-choice, no-stability,
no-completion, no-path, no-fruit, no-refuge, nothing-to-do, nothing-to-hold-on-to, no-stability, no-foothold,
no-bootstrap, nondual, not-two, not-one…][no old life to get back to, no “getting back to it” [afterwards], no
elsewhere, no other place, no world out there, no people, no hope, no fear, no remainder, nothing left over, no
permanence, no refuge, no foothold, no fixing/stilling, no depending, nothing waiting for you [to finish], no fact of
the matter, nowhere to run, nowhere to hide]

That is, it can be helpful to realize, at the finest grain, there’s no vagueness, no “mush,” no “slop.” The mind, in
some sense, is shockingly lossless. Like, there’s compression, to be sure, but that compression is shockingly lossless.

You might think of the mind as made up of incompressible, inelastic, lossless, indestructible steel cables that are all
very long and tangled together. And you need to untangle them and thread one-hundred percent of them all the way through
their individual needle holes. And because of the nature of those cables it’s simply impossible to cheat.

Or, you might think of the mind is made up of one’s and zero’s, like a computer program or something. (And, luckily,
there’s tons of parity checking.) And, by the time you’re finished, not even a single bit can be wrong. No bits left
behind, not a single one.

You don’t have to be stressed about this, in the sense that the mind is going to lead you to all those needed untwists
or bits left behind. In some sense, which is part of the whole point, the mind isn’t going to let you half-ass anything.
That’s not how the mind works.

But the main point is that, the more you go with the grain of this, the more smoothly it will go. There’s a right
ordering to everything, to be sure. And sometimes it’s going to suck.

But, if you know that you might indeed need sometimes spend five hundred hours going after one “bit,” and indeed you
might need to do that twenty times, that’s just part of the practice. That *is* the practice.

Again, the protocol will lead you to this level of conscientiousness and skill. The protocol (and the meta protocol and
the meta meta protocol) and how the mind responds will lead you to find every last one of those bits, in some sense
won’t let you do anything less, will help you be sure you’ve got them all. You’ll eventually get a taste for perfection,
flawlessness, etc.

You’ll learn how to work at the finest grain. You’ll learn how to act with continuity, continuousness, without
inappropriate gaps, jumps, jogs.

The protocol might start out feeling super clunky, not like meditation at all. But, over time, bottom up, it’ll look
more and more like “classical contemporary noting” [sic] and concentration without support.

Go with the grain of this, not against it.


physical sequelae:

If you start inclining towards the very faintest beginnings of crippling muscle tension, nerve root impingement,
intracranial pressure, intraocular pressure, then you’ve left something out. There’s a memory or a “bit” missing,
somewhere. Engage the meta protocol and meta meta protocol and the preliminary/auxilliary practices and outside
resources, if necessary, to go and find it. Ideally, do these things long before there’s even the faintest hint of
muscle tension, etc. It’s much, much easier for any of that to creep up on you than it is to dispel it.


the end of your world: (after adyashanti, maybe?)

Along with that extreme skill and extreme standards, there’s also something needed like courage or bravery.

In some sense, everything you thought you knew about everything is going to be wrong. Things are going to seem pretty
normal on the far end, but, holy shit, in the middle, sometimes.

Your deepest assumptions are going to be questioned, and you’re likely going be absolutely shocked, at least a few
times.

And some things are going to creepingly seem like horrible, horrible, intolerable “truths” at least at first. Or you’re
eventually realize you’re mistaken, or you’ll eventually realize it’s not actually that bad.

But, there’s probably going to be away in which “everything is taken from you,” sometimes figuratively or at least
psychologically (or even spiritually; or even literally, if understandably but tragically parts of your life get fucked
up).

Bravery. Courage.


drama:

Beware of decompensated impulsiveness. Don’t cheat on your significant other. Don’t blow up at your friends. Don’t
create situations where you need to be saved. Don’t be dramatic. Be exactly as dramatic as you need to be but no more.


error propagation, wayfinding, grace of what minds are:

Holy shit, a lot of warnings here, about things that can go wrong. It’s important to keep in mind, and this has been a
lifeline for me, and it’s true, the mind is ultimately reversible. Any “mistake” or mistake the mind has made, whether
it was in the first moments of consciousness or a dumbass (as it were; or completely innocent) thing you were doing for
*two thousand hours* in the course of meditation. The mind will ultimately untwist its way to that thing, raise that
thing, backchain all the necessary prerequisites, complete those, and then correct the thing. And that’s whether you’re
eighteen or ninety. All you need to do is practice correctly, to responsively, methodically, intelligently, intuitive
crank. Meditation works because this is what minds are. This is what minds do and this is what meditation does and
that’s why we’re doing it.

Error propagation, meditating (or just living) in a way that incidentally or systematically spreads and ramifies errors
throughout mind, experience, and behavior is just a thing.

But meditation is also systematic error-correction, problem-solving and backtracking.

Meditation is global wayfinding.

Meditation is not, say, “strength training” or a “faith exercise” (although surrender and faith play a part).

Meditation is unlocking an intricate puzzle box.

Meditation is global wayfinding.

Meditation is wayfinding.


conclusion:

The mind is vast but practically, nonmonotonically, asymptotically finite.

Have you been cranking?

cranking = enacting regular and routine progress; doing the thing

idealized cranking = correct use of the different parts of this document at the correct times, responsively, personally
as you concretely work with and through your individual mind

Have you been cranking?

You might also see the “gentle on-ramp”/“onramp” section elsewhere in the document as well as the “meditating by
coincidence” section.

Also, some people are turned off by the "crank"/"cranking"/"turning the crank" metaphor. Another way of looking at is
with a "learning to play music and playing music" metaphor: The preliminary/auxiliary practices are like playing the
scales. The main practices are like playing from sheet music (with personal interpretation). And then after that is
improvisation, jazz, riffing, creative, experimental, joyful--maybe "getting somewhere" (cf. "global wayfinding") and
maybe not, depending on how conceived and you proceed, on your terms, but the system is changing and changing, always
slowly and sometimes quickly.



practice:

>>>
> […] > I claim that one can't just pick a method and push that button until the end. One eventually has to transcend
> whatever instructions they're doing to find the "real feedback loops and gradients" that the words are trying to point
> at. [For what it’s worth], my method is intended to painstakingly direct people to the really real feedback loops
> they’re actually using to bootstrap them to doing an ever-better thing behind the thing. (1) The Main practices
> (abstractly specified, closed set, concretely instantiable in each moment) (2) Prelim/Aux practices (call out degrees
> of freedom to feed into the main practices) (3) Meta protocol (explicit bootstrapping and error correction) (4) Lists
> (more calling out degrees of freedom and ways to slice the pie, to feed into the main practices) […] <<<


preliminaries and vacations; conceptualization as such:

Someone comments (slightly edited):

“I’m very interested in the demarcation between meditation and not-meditation (with respect to the instructions not
‘feeling like’ meditation. Can you just basically meditate all the time, by this system, unless you have something else
to focus on in specific (job, a game, movie, in-depth conversation, whatever?)"

Answer:

It matters how you think about what you’re doing, how you explicitly or implicitly, reflectively or unreflectively,
conceive of what you’re doing, while you’re doing it.

There’s a main practice, below, where one of the components is surrender, reverie, etc. Just as in that practice, where
it’s ok to let go, to be lost, to forget, to daydream, to be in reverie, it’s also ok to get lost in life.

So when you’re working, playing, socializing, relating, it’s probably often better to just do that. (Maybe this changes,
little by little by little, as one gets very far along, and there are practices, one described below, where it’s
possible to explicitly practice with someone. But, 99% of the time, maybe, when meditating, meditate, and, when living,
just live.)

Meditating of course happens in an environment, air conditioning, kitchen appliances in the distance, wind, traffic,
machinery, conversations in another room. So meditation takes the environment into account. But there’s still sort of a
difference between meditating in an environment and living (in an environment), until there is no difference, which
never has to be forced.

***

An electronic dialogue (slightly edited):

[…]

Mark 15 minutes ago to be fair, the protocol doc is me collecting 15,000+ words of highly detailed things to remember,
for myself (and others). so there’s that. [in order to eventually “forget” it], to not need it, for it to become an
inert pedagogical tool to share with others (edited)

[…]

Collaborator 15 minutes ago i have some new thoughts on the protocol doc

Collaborator 15 minutes ago nascent thoughts

Collaborator 14 minutes ago i think you’d agree fwiw …

Collaborator 14 minutes ago [that] like for a (small?) percentage of minds [the protocol document] will drive them crazy

Mark 13 minutes ago i’m more inclined to think this than in the past

Collaborator 13 minutes ago [A long time ago I read a] quote [that] was like, “a meditator will choose the protocol that
feeds their neurosis”

Collaborator 13 minutes ago definitely not saying this is always or even usually the case

Collaborator 13 minutes ago but like, i can see the ways i’ve gotten stuck * inside * of the protocol

Mark 13 minutes ago ... …and then hopefully a protocol is good enough to eventually deconstruct that neurosis… …

Collaborator 12 minutes ago sigh

Collaborator 12 minutes ago hopefully

Collaborator 12 minutes ago i think eventually maybe

Collaborator 12 minutes ago but there might be faster ways

Collaborator 12 minutes ago jumping into deep ends

Collaborator 12 minutes ago going to wild parties

Collaborator 12 minutes ago ^ not so much that last one

Collaborator 12 minutes ago but you get the point i think

Collaborator 11 minutes ago like i think i have to forget the protocol kind of to proceed

Collaborator 11 minutes ago which isn’t exactly true

Collaborator 11 minutes ago i’ll still be following the protocol

Collaborator 11 minutes ago at least the most important ways

Mark 11 minutes ago would say that this conversation, this being verbalized, is evidence of protocol at least partially
working

agreed that some things will be hilariously ridiculously faster for some people.

“if i’d only done X first” is also kind of a thing. i’m guessing that X usually wouldn’t have had the same effect if it
came first.

Collaborator 11 minutes ago > but like, i can see the ways i’ve gotten stuck * inside * of the protocol

but have to deconstruct several layers of how i baked it into my mind

Collaborator 11 minutes ago partially yeah sure

Collaborator 11 minutes ago but like wouldn’t have gotten there with just protocol

Mark 10 minutes ago > like i think i have to forget the protocol kind of to proceed

this needs to be more explicit, yeah. it’s near top of list.

Collaborator 10 minutes ago > like i think i have to forget the protocol kind of to proceed

but can’t forget protocol when inside of the protocol

Collaborator 10 minutes ago or something like that

Mark 10 minutes ago yeah

Collaborator 10 minutes ago *for some people some of the time (edited)

Collaborator 10 minutes ago like i still think protocol is Right [Editor: Ahhhh! I’m trying to point in the direction of
something Right, “under emptiness.”]

Collaborator 10 minutes ago and maybe even Ultimate [Editor: Ahhhh! I’m trying to point in the direction of something
Right, “under emptiness.”]

Collaborator 9 minutes ago but like it’s more clear to me how i’ve gotten trapped inside it and it’s assumptions
(possibly the assumptions I gave to it)

Collaborator 9 minutes ago and like how i might just need to go sing and roll in the grass and stuff for a couple months
[kind of …, not exactly …]

Collaborator 8 minutes ago protocol feels very platonic to me

Collaborator 8 minutes ago or at least my understanding/interpretion of it

Mark 8 minutes ago the way i’m thinking about it right now is there’s sort of micro-redo-to-undo, which can often be
done in the context of main practice p2, conceptualized as such.

and then there’s also sort of macro-redo-to-undo, which can easily involve forgetting about the protocol for a few
months to go have desired experiences and experiments. and both may be very necessary. and needing to do that one to
twenty times, big macro orbits that forget about the protocol completely and then maybe pick it up again later. (edited)

Collaborator 7 minutes ago fwiw i don’t think i’ve found anything that you’d disagree with perse

Collaborator 7 minutes ago like you’ve always given room for going off and doing wild experiments

Collaborator 7 minutes ago and so maybe i haven’t listened

Collaborator 7 minutes ago but but

Collaborator 7 minutes ago at the same time

Collaborator 6 minutes ago i think there’s some assumption baked into the whole approach/attitude/mind life of protocol
(and creator? maybe??) that’s leaking out here

Collaborator 6 minutes ago some worldview, ontology, something something

Collaborator 6 minutes ago maybe

Collaborator 6 minutes ago or maybe just my (mis)understanding

Collaborator 6 minutes ago not clear

Collaborator 5 minutes ago nap time

Mark 5 minutes ago > like i still think protocol is Right > and maybe even Ultimate

I think the protocol captures something pretty well, albeit, abstractly. but everyone will interpret and reify the
conceptual homomorphism in like a slightly different place in their mind. and sometimes may need to indulge
discontinuities, like complete vacations, in order to pick it up again in way that’s seated more fortuitously.

Mark 4 minutes ago > i think there’s some assumption baked into the whole approach/attitude/mind life of protocol (and
creator? maybe??) that’s leaking out here

for sure, inevitably, even though tried to maximally abstract that out. the vibe of the whole thing. will be my
contingencies baked in a various ways. this convo one way of mitigating that to some degree.

Mark 3 minutes ago @Collaborator Can I paste this into protocol doc with some light editing? Will remove some stuff at
beginning of thread.

Mark 1 minute ago Have been looking for a way to introduce the “healthy orbiting” idea. There’s also “pre-orbiting”
where a person does a bunch of other stuff first, evaluating and comparing and maybe eliminating alternatives and
complementary practices, as well as maybe refactoring life situation, while only lightly poking at doc, before really
digging in. And that can be in stages or back-and-forth, plenty, too. And that’s fine and good.

Mark 1 minute ago “healthy orbiting and pre-orbiting”

Mark < 1 minute ago And for some people, there will be something much more direct than analytically deconstructing and
insourcing a !5,000+ word document. Or they should do that first for X months or years and then fiddle with the document
if they get stuck or something.


risks:

[from: https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2019/04/07/2000-hours-to-full-classical-enlightenment-plus-risks/]

The stuff below has a mild and transient version all the way up to an extreme and chronic version. I describe sort of
the worst-case scenarios below. In the worst case, you might need to drop everything, or as much as you possibly can,
for weeks, months, or longer to solve it, on your own or finding a teacher or teachers who can help. This could be very
costly to finances and relationships. If you experience flickers of any of the below, and you likely will, it happens, a
lot, it certainly doesn’t mean you’re on your way to a worst-case scenario, but you should treat flickers calmly but
with great seriousness. Don’t make seeming “progress” at the expense of even a slight uptick in the direction of any of
the below. Again, you will likely skirt the faint or even moderate edges of all this stuff, so don’t freak out, and/but
this is all very, very serious stuff.

*1. At the very, very worst, some people will run into extreme 24-7 muscle tension somewhere in their body lasting
months if not a couple years. (Some people also have a less terrible version where the muscle tension is only present
while actually sitting down to meditate.) That’s fine though super not great at all if it’s in your thigh or something.
But, if it’s in your head, then you’ve got significantly increased intracranial pressure or something, depending on how
your body downregulates blood pressure or vasodilates or etc. I imagine this could be really risky for someone who is at
risk for stroke. Additionally, if it happens in your neck or spine then you could be a risk for nerve root impingement
and permanent structural or neuromuscular impairment or other disc injury sequelae. And your sleep could get really
fucked up depending on how skillful you managing weird musculoskeletal stuff with pillows. These are real risks. It can
mess up exercise, intimacy, finances, daily life, etc. […]

*2. At the very worst, due to weird subtle stuff that you’ll begin experience extreme sensitivity to other people. Like,
being around people, working shoulder-to-shoulder with people, being on the phone or video chat with people, sleeping
next to someone you care about, will become radically intolerable for some number of weeks or months. This is a real
risk. This could destroy relationships both intimate and financial. Due to the same weird subtle stuff, people might
come to find being around you to become completely intolerable even if you’re fine being around them. And this as well
could destroy relationships both intimate and financial. (To me, this means that meditation and pregnancy or even having
kids under eighteen probably don’t mix or mix in risky ways.)

*3. Whether weird subtle stuff or not, your mind is figuring out how to change itself, and that’s a lot of power for a
still-dumb mind to have. So we’ll call this interim magnification of negative traits. There is a (possibly quite long)
period where self-deception as well as harm to others can very easily increase, where the meditator is blind to it and
also really hurt by all the accusations and doesn’t respond to them in a super-constructive way. This will likely be
you, especially if you think of yourself as a person who is generally really careful about this sort of thing and/or who
doesn’t have the propensity or desire to hurt other people. For more, see here:
https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2019/03/30/clickbait-title-you-are-so-bad-real-title-benevolence-subtle-imposition-manipulation-and-control-and-ideology/

*4. So then, finally, there’s emotional and motivational dysregulation, sometimes extreme, e.g. extreme suffering and
can’t do anything, for hours or days or even weeks, or even more. How fucking weird and terrible things can get, in the
worse case, cannot be overemphasized. And, it goes without saying that this can be bad for relationships and finances.
Interestingly, I currently don’t think “psychosis psychosis” [sic] is much of a risk, even when things are super crazy
weird, maybe like little flashes that are rapidly corrected, but there’s probably a non-zero risk.

*5. Finally, there’s opportunity cost.

(*) Again, this could break you, this could ruin your life, ruin your mind, ruin your relationships, hurt a significant
other, hurt your kids in entire-life-affecting subtle and overt ways, etc.


transitioning from other practices (re "sharp cutovers"):

If you are coming to these practices from many hours of other practices or another lineage, it can be sometimes helpful
to deliberately and exploratorily interleave your old practices with new ones, prior to a bootstrap of greater and
greater intuition for what to do when and how. (This might be on a timescale of seconds, minutes, hours, days, or weeks.
It just depends.)

"Sharp cutovers," where a person leaves an old practice behind, for a new practice, and never touches the old one again,
can lead to problems, in part because a person will have to touch the old practices (or their results), again,
eventually, in order to make continued progress. And, it's sometimes easier to do that sooner rather than later. (See,
in part, the idea of "redo-to-undo," later in the document, as well as the idea of "layering.")

It's like the old practice, depending on how much "undoing" you were already doing, has built up scaffolding, built up
more each time one engages the practice. And, it takes some fraction of that time, in the future, to take down that
scaffolding (while keeping the benefits). If one switches over to doing a new practice, too soon or too completely, it
can leave scaffolding behind that eventually gums things up, later. (Though, you will have the opportunity to clean
things up, then, at that later time, of course; it just might be at greater expense. Or(!), you'll have much more
experience in the future, and it's much better to just wait to go back (and you may spontaneously find yourself there
when it's time, in any case). It all just depends.)

Note also, anyway, that many people should just keep doing something in the space of what they've been prevously doing,
for a time, or on and off. The "meta framework" of this document smoothly admits any and all practices (see the
preliminary/auxilliary practices, main practice p2, etc.) Many people import practices from other lineages or find those
practices already in the document, in some same, similar, or otherwise nearby form. (Eventually one moves beyond
"practices" to just step-by-step, concrete, fine-grain doing, a la radically unstructured global wayfinding.)

So, if things feel fine, or going back and forth is confusing and "grindy" it's (maybe very) ok to just cautiously go
ahead and trust your felt/intuitive sense of what to be doing (which could be new things or old things or creative mixes
or amalgams of the two). This is, at least, just something to keep in mind. You'll eventually return, somehow, to the
things you've already done, maybe liminally, at least once, and usually many times.

In any case, it can be helpful to keep in mind that some people are sometimes inclined towards "sharp cutover(s)" in a
possibly problematic way.


environment and subtlety; (more) risks and rabbit holes:

[editing note: needs at least some editing to tighten up the point being made and for run-on sentences, at the very,
very least. may go for more concrete examples, later, too, along a bunch of dimensions.]

As you dissemble and reassemble your idiosyncratically built up sensory processing system, as it were, choice about
where and when you meditate can matter, more some times and less other times, over the long run, sometimes for
idiosyncratic reasons and sometimes for more general reasons. Over time, you must come to be able to make good choices
about when to modify your environment (time/money/mental/interpersonal cost-permitting) and when to leave it alone
(time/money/mental/interpersonal cost-permitting), whether during meditation or just in daily life.

So, environment-wise, systematically or opportunistically, it can be good to try many different things, and to try to
discern what makes differences if there are seemingly differences:

inside structures outside of structures, outside different structures/buildings different rooms in structures/buildings
different locations in rooms different times of day: sunrise/dawn, sunset/dusk, noon, middle of the night, early morning
hours, early evening city, suburbia, rural areas, countryside sea level, high hills, mountains different humidity, air
pressure, temperature on boats and airplanes by rivers, lakes, oceans different soundscapes and vistas or lack thereof
different weather conditions soundscapes and vistas and lack thereof

You can also get a lot of cheap variety if you’re doing walking meditation, indoors or out and about.

The claim is not that you must spend the time, money, and mental energy for exotic meditation experiences, definitely
not that. And, surely, over time, you you want to be able to meditate effectively (and live fully) under a sufficiently
wide range of conditions.

[Some environments might be good every once in a while to maybe get unstuck, but are not necessary, and can be
prohibitively costly to do regularly: anechoic rooms, flotation tanks and other sensory deprivation chambers, etc. I’ve
played with a couple of these a few times, but in no way relied on them. It seemed like a good idea to include them for
completeness.]

But, all sorts of weird, counterintuitive things can matter over the short and long run, so it’s good to experiment. At
least some of the variables are cheap to manipulate, and other variables can be manipulated opportunistically.

You’ll start to notice subtler and subtler things, which will afford data that might sometimes be interpreted
“superstitiously.” So, this is also yet another channel to explore and refine your epistemics, self-beliefs,
meditation-beliefs, and cost/opportunity-beliefs, and to generate explanations of apparent influences on your practice,
which you might find to be real or illusory, over time, and which you might become more and more robust to, over time,
if they are real. (You might also transiently become more and more affected by them, which might be why they became more
and more salient to you in the first place, whether for “superstitious” reasons, or not, which would not be unusual, and
depends on idiosyncratic factors.)

In any case, sometimes it’s a very, very good idea to meditate when weird right-now distracting or unpleasant
environmental stuff is going on. And other times, it’s more productive to seek out different conditions for meditation.

This is yet another area where you may go a little crazy before you go saner than you were before. And, trying to
arrange one’s environment, because of believed/experienced effects, those effects may or may not actually being long-run
problematic, whether one is meditating or living life, can become costly in way that, for people without the time and
money, can be a net life negative.

In response to an earlier draft of this section, a collaborator writes:

>>>
[A] […] You may discover that obvious and non-obvious stimuli have a distracting [or otherwise right-now-believed-to-be
negative] effect[s….] And also, you may discover that some of these are chronically present in your environment, which
you were not aware of, and you may become convinced they're bad for you, and please don't fuck up your life. <<<
>>>
[A] […] To expand on the don't fuck up your life part, some well-intentioned gaslighting may be in order. Point out
meditator's pain which not really about the position of your leg, point out that even ordinarily you will sometimes find
a sound intolerable that you live with otherwise, point out that you are already inhabiting the world including these
aspects and removing yourself from that comes with trade-offs (morality is the first teaching etc) […] <<<
>>>
[A] By the way I think you really do have a tightrope to navigate here because one of the unique things about this
system and this community is all the […] baggage it comes with, positive and negative. Assuming that any sort of
spiritual practice will make you start acting like a crazy weirdo for a little bit, I find it much preferable that it
goes in the direction of buying an air quality monitor or talking about primal sleeping positions and doing things in
the spirit of […] weirdo optimizations rather than […] <<<
>>>
[A] Like I blew $200 on that [air quality monitor] and now I wonder about brain damage when […] lights a scented candle
But otoh it's nice to get a ping to crack a window sometimes instead of being distressed that I'm just not feeling smart
or energetic today <<<
>>>
Mark 1:15 PM yeah. it’s true. both. i think all of it can get integrated and sort of a costless choice to light the
candle or not, open the window or not, but possibly crazy in middle and some people won’t have time/money/something to
weather the crazy and it won’t be net good for them. <<<
>>>
[A] 1:16 PM Yeah, exactly Eat less carbs when it's a cheap option because it is legit better, but still outperform when
you're on a pasta-based diet Learn what is orthorexia vs just being right <<<
>>>
Mark 1:29 PM Yeah. One of my ex’s knew me for a health nut and was shocked when I ate a huge Snicker’s bar in front of
her. And I was like, well, a few of these will be like they never happened, and, I didn’t have time to cook, and, I know
it won’t make sleepy and also I won’t be hungry for hours, and if I eat it all at once and then eat normal food later
then it won’t contribute to insulin resistance. And I know I’m going to get some magnesium and potassium (etc.) later,
and they have much lower trans fat than they used to, and peanuts are poison but only if you eat a ton for like a whole
week or two, and… And she was like, oh, [aspirationally] reality-based. And I guess this generalizes to every single
damn choice ever. (edited) […] “now you have n+1 problems before you have n-1 problems” or something. <<<


movement:

How to engage with movement? One could think of movement as falling into these categories:

1) subtle (including postural readjustment; sitting or standing, etc.) 2) one-off overt movements (including postural
readjustment; sitting or standing, etc.) 3) structured repetitive movement (e.g. tai chi, qigong, slow-walking
meditation, dish washing) 4) unstructured relatively still (standing around, shifting weight, looking around, whatever)
5) unstructured in motion (walking, jogging, swimming, etc.)

***

All of the ways of engaging above can be helpful at different times, with varying degrees of “stringency.”

Subtle movement, aliveness, poise (sometimes!) facilitates meditative progress!

Allowing only subtle movement (so suppressing one-off over movements) can make very subtle things more salient.

Allowing one-off, overt movements can help the system get over “humps.”

Structured repetitive movement is sometimes good for getting the benefits of movement as well as keeping the mind just a
little bit occupied, in a good way.

Unstructured repetitive movement (e.g. a long walks) tends to draw people into reverie, daydreaming, etc., in a good
way.

***

In general, urges and impulses to move can be deferred, but there’s usually something there that needs to be expressed,
eventually, at least liminally. So it can be good to think of suppressed urges or impulses as debt that eventually needs
to be paid off. Sometimes it can be good to hold movement in abeyance, to allow important subtlety to become salient.
But, sometimes, it’s better just to “move now” because you’ll eventually need to “move later,” anyway.

***

Structured repetitive movement can be thought of as an optional investment that doesn’t always net pay off. It takes
time for such movements to become relatively automatic, such that they can be interleaved with meditation in a way that
doesn’t clash and jar with meditation (or thought). For some people, it’s worth the investment, as a sort of delimiting
container for meditation, where the movement helps to move things along and there’s just enough room for variation to
get over state-space humps. For other people (perhaps most people?), such a container isn’t necessary and can add
significant complexity, over the long-run, that isn’t worth it.

***

Unstructured repetitive movement (e.g. long walks) tends to draw people into reverie, daydreaming, etc., and sometimes
people find this initially unattractive if they’re “trying to meditate,” but sometimes reverie and daydreaming are the
most important thing to be doing. People need almost as much unstructured reverie time as they do “meditation time,” at
least long-run, in order to “go all the way.” Meditation masters take long, aimless walks, with no particular relation
to their (body)mind, as long and as often as they have time for, and it’s unwasted time; it’s time well spent, in terms
of their values and goals and hopes and dreams, as it were. If you do take long walks, a key piece is “nonvigilance,”
and so just make sure you’re in a safe environment, where you can naturally “space out.” People are generally ok, if
they’re undistracting strangers at a distance or just passing you on the trail. Cars can be more loud and disruptive,
depending, even if you’re safely on the sidewalk.

If it’s hard to “sit down to meditate” or meditation has lately been “immediately going wrong” (in some very loose
sense!), then often the right thing to do is to just take aimless walks, for hours and hours. One can also leave open
blocks of time to do random chores at home and kind of slowly “back onto the cushion” and hop right back off again if
things become problematic.


posture: (section needs editing)

You should be continually cycling through different meditation postures, to vary the kinds of feedback you’re giving
your system. This reduces risk, including the risk of muscle tension issues. You might sit and stand in a single day. Or
you can sit for three days, stand for two days, be in bed or on the couch for a day, etc. Never trade increased muscle
tension for “progress.” It’s not worth it. I personally meditate pretty equally sitting, standing, and lying down (I
might do one of these for several days in a row then switch). I do less walking (while “meditating-meditating,” but see
below) and yoga asanas. Sort of unrelatedly, but I wanted to add it somewhere, I also alternate earplugs versus no
earplugs, blanket or no blanket, sleep mask or pitch black room versus bright room or open space, eyes open versus eyes
closed, laying on back, laying on my right side, laying on my left side, etc.

Favorite meditation postures/combinations (unordered): sitting, lying down back/sides, Zhan Zhuang / standing, walking,
running/jogging, yoga asanas, eyes open/closed, earplugs +/-, eye shades / complete darkness / pitch black +/-, netflix,
amazon video, facebook, twitter, watching blog stats

Ah, also like "erect kneeling", knees on something padded, and otherwise "standing" straight. (If I'm doing standing
meditation and my feet start to hurt, I switch between standing and this type of kneeling.) Different postures change
salience of different feedback loops. Safer.

Others: leaning with back (butt) against low things like countertops where everything above the lean is
unsupported/erect. Leaning back against walls. Finally, sometimes facing wall bracing with hands.

more distinctions: sitting without back support, sitting with back support (still erect), and hella slumped in some
comfortable couch or chair in some long-term comfortable way. always mix with erect/unsupported sitting and standing!

more distinctions: sitting on a hard, very flat (parallel to ground, no tilting) surface; sitting on a very firm but
nevertheless soft surface (like a big memory foam block)…

Sometimes you may find yourself drawn to particular, idiosyncratic "finger mudras," as well as leg crossings, and/or arm
crossings.

Also, E Tai Chi (https://www.amazon.com/Tai-Chi-Basic-Book-Simplest-ebook/dp/B01MREOH1P/ …), custom/ad hoc tai chi, and
custom/ad hoc yoga asanas

[Also: ad hoc “internal martial arts” rearranging your weight, rearranging your stance, rearranging your relationship
with gravity, rearranging your physical anticipations…]

Also, sort of “upright fetal position”, maybe in the corner of a big chair or couch, with one’s back against the armrest
and leaning to the side against the back. I am more likely to stay awake in this position if I’m tired but I can still
drift in and out of sleep while meditating, and it’s a different kind of balance than laying in bed.

Also, custom/ad hoc device assisted stretches

Also, ad hoc dancing, bouncing, rocking, fidgeting, stretching, yoga pretzels…

Earplugs can enhance sensitivity to subtle muscle movement and body creaking in head and neck and elsewhere but make
sure meditate plenty without earplugs, too.

Long-sleeve clothing, pants (vs shorts/skirts) or blankets reduce subtle air current and temperature changes on skin
which can make it easier to attend to other things. (So, sometimes this is good to do and sometimes it’s better to be
exposed to the elements.)

Long-run, retrospectively, you might have spent equal time sitting, standing, and laying down while meditating.
Sometimes it’s good to switch every day or every hour.

On twitches and posture and readjustments— Might want to gently restrain Might want to gently repeat Might want to
gently hold in the “twitched” position for a while to see what happens Might want to gently especially facilitate and
allow

Long walks while daydreaming or in reverie could be considered a posture—wandering aimlessly around in safe
environments, where you don’t have to be “on,” is also very important, ideally for hours and hours!

Another postural thing to vary: Surfaces from very hard concrete to very soft for standing, sitting, and laying down,
for very different kinds of feedback. For lying down: both on back and side, with and without a pillow. You might look
into “natural sleeping postures. Firmer head or neck pillows can give better feedback for spotting creeping muscle
tension or having it not arise in the first place.”

You should check to make you’re not losing flexibility or that certain physical movements (or patterns of attention)
aren’t becoming subtly unpleasant or aversive. Also, barbell weight training and bodyweight exercise is good, too, as
another way to check for whether something is off, e.g. if some exercises become aversive or you’re losing strength or
less able to transmit power through structure.

If you do unfortunately run into some of the warned-about muscle tension, the below can be helpful. I’d imagine one
would only experience likely one of these or zero:

For hand/finger cramps/clenching, a stress ball or a wadded shirt can be helpful to grip or to prevent joint
compression.

Laying down with a cradle of pillows can give the neck something to support or push against.

For jaw tension, you might bite down on something or use a mouthguard, some things will better and worse for your teeth
and better and worse for jaw alignment.

Generally, if an irritated joint wants to move, having things to squeeze, press against, or slide against can slow
things down, reduce currently problematic degrees of freedom and/or increase feedback through resistance or friction.

In summary, it’s good to be able to meditate sitting or standing tall, but it’s also good to be able to arrange your
environment when/if that’s the best thing, too.

***

More:

[book recommendations: feldenkrais awareness through movement, anatomy trains yoga, starting strength, becoming a supple
leopard]

Some takes on “perfect meditation posture:”

Johnson, Will. Aligned, relaxed, resilient: The physical foundations of mindfulness. Shambhala Publications, 2000.
Johnson, Will. The posture of meditation: A practical manual for meditators of all traditions. Shambhala
Publications, 1996. The Way of Energy: Mastering the Chinese Art of Internal Strength with Chi Kung Exercise (A Gaia
Original) by Master Lam Kam-Chuen (books about Zhan Zhuang, in general)

“Perfect posture” should be explored for the possibility of maximal useful feedback and safety.


breath:

Some traditions place great importance on the breath, as an aid to concentration, as a source of interesting
observational data, as a way to affect thinking and emotions, as illustrative of the border or lack thereof between
doing and non-doing, and more.

Additionally, some traditions place great importance on *proper* breathing, e.g. abdominal or diaphragmatic breathing,
and more.

The methods in this document don’t place great importance on the breath, allowing the breath to correct itself over
time. Sometimes it’s ok to deliberately attend to the breath and sometimes one’s attention (or etc.) will be
magnetically drawn to the breath. Sometimes attention to the breath will be effortless and non-interfering, and
sometimes attention to the breath will seem to “stop” or dysregulate the breath. Sometimes it’s good to gently and
deliberately avoid attending to the breath or to forget about the breath as best one can, to let it settle down. And
sometimes one might not think explicitly about the breath or “foreground” (or even “background”) attend to breathing for
a very long time, and this is fine. Sometimes breathing will be heaving or hitching, and this fine. Sometimes, one might
briefly feel like they can *only* breath deliberately or that they can’t breath at all, and so on.

Long-run, one might barely reflectively attend very much or not at all to the breath, for thousands of hours or
indefinitely, or at least do so only as much one might attend to anything else, generally, with respect to body, mind,
and environment, etc., “in” the entire “phenomenological field.”

Over time, all things being equal, with “right engagement” and right “non-engagement,” breathing will tend to become
ever-more-subtle, over time. This subtlety will be reflected in the barely perceptible use (or non-use) of all breathing
muscles, from diaphragm, stomach/belly, chest, shoulders, and more. Sometimes the subtlest changes in posture are all
that’s needed for “breathing.”

What’s happening, here, is that breathing has “volitional” components and an “autogenic” component. And, over time,
“volitional” components can get habitually convolved with the autogenic components, leading to overbreathing and other
kinds of disregulated breathing. Through meditation, volitional components can be “deconvolved” out of breathing,
leaving mostly just the autogenic component, which, generally, can take care of itself. (Note that this untangling,
“deconvolving,” may involve much of the rest of the system, too, so attention elsewhere than to the breath, may have
long-run positive effects on breathing, and so on. It’s a global sort of puzzle, where breathing is only one piece and
is indirectly affected, sometimes, by the rest of it.)

Deliberate or stereotyped attention to the breath, breath control (e.g. emphasizing inhalation or exhalation, or
panting, belly breaths, even chanting, etc.), over hundreds of hours, can “tangle in” volitional components that need to
eventually be untangled. (Sometimes this can be strategic, though, on a person-by-person basis.) Tingly lightheadness,
needing to pee very often, issues with throat smooth muscle tone and sleep, can be signs that one is generally
overbreathing, because of breathing’s connection to kidney function, autonomic regulation, and more. Aerobic and
anaerobic exercise, such as jogging and sprinting, can short-term improve breathing issues, via effects on blood-gas CO2
tolerance. But, long-term, one must deconvolve volitional components from the breathing, as part of the global
meditation puzzle.

Note: “attention,” “foreground,” “background,” “in,” “phenomenological field,” are used very loosely in this section and
are not technical or ontological commitments


states:

Some traditions emphasize cultivation of altered states, residing in altered states, and/or mastery of altered states.

This meditation system doesn’t place particular emphasis on altered states and is of the position that systematic
cultivation is unnecessary. Intermittent, gentle facilitation of potentially spontaneously arising altered states can be
important, though. Through application of method, a meditator may spontaneously “stage”/“prepare” for entry into an
altered state, “pop into” the state, “do whatever’s necessary” in that state, and quickly or eventually “pop back out.”
This can and will eventually, naturally, and spontaneously happen in the course of meditation and doesn’t need to be
deliberately cultivated as such. It’s of course generally fine to incline towards interesting or attractive states
(perhaps checked against something like the meta protocol) and it’s of course fine to explore and experiment with
concentration and tranquility practices.

Deliberate engagement with concentration and tranquility practices can sometimes “burn in” (reversibly!) habits of mind
that eventually need to be undone for further progress, which can be a lengthy process. Sometimes light (or even
moderate) deliberate cultivation *can* be strategic, on a person by person basis—many of the preliminary/auxiliary
practices suggest concentration-/tranquility-like things to try and experiment with. That being said, there’s a right
thing, right time, right way, right dose, gently, sensitively, responsively (with plenty of room for error and
backtracking) ethos. And much or quite all of engagement with “altered states” can happen spontaneously and naturally,
in the course of practice.


“headyness”/“heady-ness”/“headiness”:

[This section refers to main practice p2, which is discussed in detail at a later time. One can still get a lot out of
this section before encountering a full description of p2.]

There’s a particularly notable imbalance that may arise from modernity, which can be lengthy and counterintuitive to
correct. And that imbalance is something like “being too in the head,” “acting from the head,” “living, thinking, being,
etc. ‘from the shoulders up’ or even ‘the jaw up’.”

Correcting this isn’t as simple as paying more attention to the body or trying to be in the body. Doing body things “out
of order” or “monolithically” can even tangle things up more: “Right thing, right time, right place, right order, at a
finer and finer grain.”

The protocol as written (well, including this section or not), especially inclusive of the meta protocol, is intended to
work as a proper antidote to headiness, implicitly, inclusively, as part of the practice progression as a whole, nothing
more to say or add.

But, for some people, saying a little more may be very helpful. The protocol document, as a written/typed document, is,
of course, verbal and even hyperanalytical, even if it’s very often pointing at something very undifferentiated,
experiential, and sensual. So!—Even more words are written, here, as a corrective to that. :-)

For example, there’s a way that p2 can be initially be done “too much in the head,” too conceptually,
“too-conceptually-tangly.” Note that p2 DOES account for this; p2, the other main practices, and the meta protocol do
account for this. p2, itself, can and does undo its own potential headiness, all things being equal. But, again, some
people might be greatly accelerated or have reduced (physical, or otherwise) sequelae by taking this section into
account.

Some people will naturally do/interleave p2 “whole body” (whole everything) and some people, at first, won’t be able to
do p2 except for in the head.

Meditation is ever, always, already with the whole body, of course (and mind, and everything)—all of experience, the
entire phenomenological field and “envelope.”

Some traditions particularly emphasize this, on the front-end; they explicitly say, “meditate with the body, not with
the mind.” This goes beyond even attending to the body or “body scanning,” and is more things like these: “active
sitting,” “active ‘just’ sitting,” “just sitting,” meditation through posture, meditation exclusively through continuous
postural adjustment, meditation through breathing and continuous effort and non-effort with respect to breathing, and so
on.

I would consider these pith instructions incomplete (and the above is a straw and is not intended to refer to any
particular tradition). But, in any case, instructions with this sort of flavor can be an overlooked dimension of much
contemporary practice. Do explore them; they should probably get added to the preliminary/auxiliary practices (a bunch
of them already are).

Again, p2 is “all-inclusive,” pre-conceptual, post-conceptual, trans-conceptual: body, mind, bodymind, head, heart,
concept, quality, etc.

And, don’t be TOO concerned about headiness—every meditator in modern culture will rightly spend PLENTY of time in the
head, or flickeringly returning to the head, half-second by half-second, one-hundred-milliseconds by
one-hundred-milliseconds, maybe interleaved with other things, while using these practices—e.g. as part of “do-to-undo”
or “redo-to-undo.” That is, the head (“mind, muscles, and more”) is needed for untangling the head! Trying to do it just
with the body will long-run cause more tangling.

So, one shouldn’t avoid the head or be afraid to spend time in the head, as it were. These are just words, the meta
protocol and one’s intuition should be a bottom-up guide. And the “lists and more” section breaks down the “landscape”
or “playing field” in many different ways, including a great deal of body phenomenology. There are, of course, many
relevant preliminary/auxiliary practices, too.

In any case, use words to go beyond words. Use the head to go beyond the head. Don’t let words limit you, or cautions
and corrections using yet more words, and so on. And also don’t be afraid of words, and so on. Traverse and/or allow
everything, right time, right order, right grain, which is to say, what ever happens, or is happening, is part of the
practice.

***

Below are notes from a call with a collaborator (jd), with further maybe-helpful corrections to the potentially “felt
verbal/intellectual vibe” of parts of the document, for some people:

* possibly useful things for people, from retrospective experience:

* possible danger of too much willing too soon [Mark: I actually [now] use willing very [sparingly] and I had to clean
  up a lot of incorrect willing.]

* possible danger of neurotically heady good/bad in use of p2 (“p2” carried out in the head, what a trap, hard to detect
  from the inside)[…] [Mark note: […] Mark “broke out” of headiness eventually by seeing how the headiness eventually
  failed and failed, sort of came to a point and then “moved along the wall” until—” nowhere to go but “body,” sort of.
  Or body cracked open eventually and inevitably.]

* over-ontologization of experience--classifying experience in terms of doings, willings, good, bad, can lead to a
  kludgy thing - headiness—can carve out experience in a weird way

* maybe good to emphasize lots of surrender, don’t even call it meditation. a lot less doing. [Mark note: I personally
  eventually got stuck doing [ONLY] surrender and non-doing.]

* […] [Mark: p2 eventually becomes, “minimally-ontological” and whole-body or whole-body-available[…]]

* time in nature, return to immediate and physical, “skipped level [1],” went back to fundamentals and being.
  unplugging—more space, time, less urgency to do things with mind. naturally drawn back into own experience. concern
  though about running away or shoving problems where harder to see or is this a maneuver that let look at problems that
  actually ready to solve. [Mark note: people like shinzen think that unplugged situations might naturally draw people
  into meditative states, sun on the water, wind in the trees, alone in a cabin, etc. maybe indigenous people are [more]
  natural meditators, [*sometimes*] cadence it creates, the example it sets. [Mark: higher quality data [in nature], or
  data that’s less weird and edge-case-y; modernity is a very weird data set. in nature: better stream of data about how
  reality and mind actually work.]

* try to do everything as physical as possible; very healing. if were having a crisis, but the trees are just chilling,
  not having a crisis, and that’s important data. or hanging out with community; it’s happy; there’s food and water.

* civilization is a lot and facebook is a lot and dealing with 2000 people is a lot. and if didn’t master the earlier
  version of the thing, the more immediate, animal, physical, primal thing then it’s hard. paraphrase: maybe sometimes
  need to (partially) go back and relearn primal thing maybe for first time[Mark: maybe this is why monasteries exist
  though monasteries aren’t nature. maybe a lot of people have to sort of rebuild the basics.] small community in nature

* arriving at all this was confusing because didn’t seem like what mark was doing. [Mark: makes sense. all seems right
  to me and I’ve done a ton of just wandering around, maybe not in remote nature, but away from people, in parks or
  where I knew that I knew nobody even if there were people around 20-50 feet away, and i knew it was completely safe so
  I could just space out[, be in reverie or landscape-absorbed] for hours.]


body, self-trust, sensory processing, meaning:

[For this draft, if any single sentence doesn’t make sense, it’s probably ok to skip that sentence and keep reading.]

Deciding when to self-trust can be hard. Frameworks like the Meta Protocol can help. (The meta protocol will be
discussed, soon, in a subsequent section.) In addition to protocols, procedures, etc., it can help to think about
various dimensions of knowing (and perhaps understanding, and perhaps other things) as a sort of backdrop to self-trust.

One could consider knowing (intuiting, etc.) along at least two axes:

1. degree of provenance/origin transparency
2. degree of symbolic versus nonsymbolic representation/“representation” and provenance

The first axis is pointing at something like “knowing where it came from or how it came to be,” knowing the causal
history of how you came to know something, as it were. One can imagine “a knowing,” knowledge, insight, something, sort
of just appearing in the mind, and you don’t know where it came from or how it got there. One can also imagine, having
(or being able to construct) a rich history of all the experiencing and evidence and
thinking/figuring/inferring/something of how you came to know/feel/believe some particular thing. This history might be
verbal or nonverbal, partial or complete, sequentially accessible or felt “all at once,” sparse-symbolic or richly felt,
or a mixture of any or all of these, all at once.

(Note that the “causal history” of some of your knowledge can be very different than, in no particular order, (a) your
“current best argument,” either the one you feel like you probably could produce, verbally, at least in bits and pieces,
if pressed, or (b) the rich, felt anticipations in your body that are, well, the embodiment of that knowing, or (c) what
you might tell yourself about that knowing that you wouldn’t necessarily share with other people, or (d) other
phenomenological aspects of that knowing not specified in (abc). To summarize, your current and future states, are
different than your previous states, and your current and future states can have different representations (or at least
present lack thereof of those representations) of previous states, in degree and type/kind.)

The second axis is maybe a bit more self-explanatory—was the *route* to that knowing more or less symbolic? Is it’s
current form more or less symbolic?

More symbolic routes of knowing might be things like thinking, “figuring,” calculating, inferring, abducting, deducing,
writing.

“Medium-symbolic” routes of knowing might be things like verbally describing, “iconically imagining,” simulating,
running thought experiments, sketching and drawing on paper. (Perhaps: “multischematic”)

Less symbolic and non symbolic routes of knowing could be things like feeling, sensing, perceiving, gnosis, direct
knowing, direct awareness, “expanded awareness,” “listening/feeling for the subtle, distant, faint, interconnected,”
intuition. (Perhaps: “innumerable, ineffable, inchoate”)

Both axes (1) and (2) could perhaps be very loosely, messily, and jointly summarized along a single axis from
unconscious to explicit:

(a) unconscious (b) implicit/inexplicit/tacit/felt (less “knowing-feeling”, less “meaning-laden”) (c) explicit (more
knowing-feeling and meaning-laen)

***

At least in modern times (for some very loose and general definition of modern), we have a habit of privileging explicit
knowing and explicit justification. If we don’t have explicit knowing and/or explicit justification (or we don’t feel
like we can produce it, or at least bits and pieces of it) it might be harder for us to self-trust (as well as it being
harder to navigate the familial, social (and professional) worlds…). We might lose track of goals, lose track of
reasons, forget desires, not act on goals and desires, and so forth. We might be more indecisive and act less
consistently.

But, the basis of self-legitimate and self-credible self-trust (including, e.g. trusting that we can wield
argumentation/justification if/when we ever need to) starts in the prereflective and the intuitive. Consider, the
prereflective and intuitive are what choose to wield (explicit) argumentation, even if the producing, wielding, or
consuming) of argumenation are things that modulate the prereflective and implicit. One could say that self-trust is
constituted by the entire experiential field, which takes into account the present state of the self as well as past,
present, and future of self and world.

***

We can learn to value and to legitimately and credibly trust the implict and intuitive more and more over time.
Importantly, even if the provenance of some knowing isn’t “directly accessible,” features of the knowing itself can be
used for indirect accessment of value, correctness, etc. (This assessment itself can be intuitive, prereflective, “in a
flash,” though it doesn’t have to be. “Nonsymbolic regress” does bottom out, even when symbolic regress does not.)

Importantly, nonsymbolic knowing tends to come with reletively less explicit provenance, but nonsymbolic knowing does
tend to come with more rich phenomenology, even when it doesn’t “experientially display” it’s provenance, all at once
(and sometimes it does). And that rich phenomenology can still be “used” or experienced in a way that allows one to
*learn* how to properly treat/engage/regard that richness with respect to behavior. And that treatment might be
reflective or unreflective/prereflective—“already in motion before you even realize it” turns out to be retrospectively
valid, much of the time, and more and more.

The felt, the implicit, the intuitive can be subject to (implicit or explicit) critique or error-checking, just like the
explicit. And it can therefore it can be a basis of self-trust.

One can start with little bets, little tests, or just patience to see how an intuition or feeling evolves. You can start
with things that are relatively costless, local, impactless, safe.

***

There are a lot of “negative feedback loops” when playing with intuitive knowing (and correctives will be discussed
below).

When one first starts exploring intuitive knowing, one might treat it “almost analytically,” in a way that’s sort of
just as “slow and exhausting” as with more explicit knowing. So it can seem not worth it, because it’s “like explicit
knowing but even more fragmentary and one can tell even less about what’s going on.”

It can go in the other direction, too—one could accidentally sort of “turn on the tap,” and get flooded with urges,
impulses, sensing, illumination, something, that’s overwhelming, far too much, that one doesn’t know how to shut off,
let alone interpret or trust.

Part of problem, here, is that there’s sort of a whole additional dimension to all of this, that gets overlooked,
because it’s so counterintuitive and time-delayed.

While overlooked, it’s sort of also a cliche at this point: And that is… the body.

***

So, regarding the body, there’s yet another way to slice things:

1. symbolic knowing (knowledge involving symbols)
2. nonsymbolic knowing/thinking/etc.
3. meaning-laden sensation (and “imagination”)
4. non-meaning-laden sensation (and “imagination”)

The line between (2) and (3), nonsymbolic knowing and meaning-laden sensation is a bit blurry. Also, it’s worth calling
out that symbolic knowing doesn’t exist without nonsymbolic knowing (and perhaps meaning-laden sensation) somehow being
present, simultaneously.

In any case, the entire discussion above, in this section, so far, has been loosely referring to (1-3) but not 4. And,
people typically ignore non-meaning-laden sensations unless they’re particularly salient—hunger, thirst, pain, sensuous
stretching, sexual pleasure, orgasm, etc. But, the rest of the time, we don’t pay attention to body sensations very
much. (One could further subdivide (1-4) according to whether their “valence” is (a) pleasant/pleasurable/attractive
versus (b) unpleasant/noxious/etc versus (c) neutral…but things complexify when considering “hurts so good” phenomena,
from delayed-onset-muscle-soreness, after exercise, to BDSM.)

Attending to non-meaning-laden body sensations might feel like a waste of time, annoying, or even terrifying if it draws
someone into the “here and now,” and they don’t want to be there, for whatever reason.

(I want to call attention to a particular concern that people sometimes have, when body sensations are discussed. People
sometimes wonder if they’re going to get the advice (or have it unspoken but heavily implied) that they’re supposed to
walk around paying attention to body sensations for the rest of their lives in some “mindful” but distracting and even
pointless-feeling way. Don’t worry, that’s not where we’re going with this.)

In any case, let’s talk theory, for a moment. I’ve been using the word “sensation” loosely. One might also use terms
like apprehension, perception, and interpretation and so forth. Let’s be a little more careful, here. One could imagine
a human “sensory processing pipeline” starting with “raw perception” or “raw sensaton,” that’s perhaps almost
immediately processed and interpretated (or, even, is *never* “uninterpreted, in some sense), and then that “data”
participates in higher- and higher-level “processing,” perhaps while still being “non-meaning-laden,” and then, at some
point, through perhaps some opaque process, this “sensory data” tips over into participating in “meaning-laden inference
and knowing” (whether unconscious or conscious).

Provsionally assuming some kind of pipeline like that, I want to offer an immediate correction, which is something like,
non-meaning-laden sensation and minimally-symbolic knowing, or some sort, are paired, almost instantly, at the beginning
of the processing stack. Almost as soon as there’s sensation, there’s rudimentary (or not) *knowing* about that
sensation, even if we’re not consciously aware of it. (This *may* be quite a bit different than, say, one of Daniel
Ingram’s schemas, that may look superficially similar, just FYI.)

So, this may make immediate sense because, there’s plenty of sensation and noise going on, all the time, only a small
portion of it making it (“all the way up”) into consciousness, for example if it’s (maybe subliminally) surprising or
about something possibly dangerous. And that sort of “meaning-laden” decision-making needs to start before it’s
conscious. We learn over time what to filter from consciousness and what to promote to consciousness, and this is
getting sculpted in real time, all the time, and the sculpting process itself (or at least its real time effects) are
sometimes unconscious and sometimes conscious. (I might say “sometimes unreflective” and “sometimes reflective,”
depending on how we’re precisely using all these words, and whether something can be “conscious” without our being aware
of it or at least remembering being aware of it, and so on, and so on.)

Ok, so, again, anyway, there’s this (massively parallel) “pipeline” that has both a non-meaning-laden and a
meaning-laden component much earlier than is typically consciously obvious.

And, let’s add a few more pieces:

1. Any stage or branch of the (massively parallel, branching and joining) processing pipeline can be “raised” and
   “lowered” into and out of consciousness.
2. When pipeline stages/branches are raised into consciousness they are and can be “refactored,” both the
   non-meaning-laden sensory processing as well as the meaning-laden component, as well as the relationship between the
   two. (This refactoring “interwingles” with local and adjacent sensory memory that has previuosly been processed by
   that part of the pipeline. In some sense, that sensory memory is *constitutive* of the pipeline.)

A qualifier: When I say “any” stage of the pipeline, there may still be some prior “never conscious” stage of sensory
processing, of course, especially looking at the neurophysiology, but it sure can practically feel like one can be
directly conscious [being philosophically loose, here] of the very first wiggle of one’s sensory neurons, ear hairs,
retina, etc., and anything “after” that.

Another qualifier: “Raising” and “lowering” isn’t “separably direct;” it’s a highly constrained “puzzle” over the course
of thousands and thousands of hours. For example, to raise “piece” X, when might need to raise and lower thousands and
thousands of other “pieces” in a complex order, in order to “get to” X. And raising and lowering can seem very
indirect—it’s “tied” to “the movement/change of attention/awareness” in nonlocal ways. That is, “attending” to
something, somewhere may influence raising and lowering “elsewhere.”

Another qualifier: “Raising, lowering, depth, up, down, etc.” not to mention “pieces, pipes, parts, branches” are all
leaky abstractions or a less-well-differentiated complexity. There’s some sense in which the brain and/or mind is, not
only massively parallel, but also “flat” (and/or its activity is simultaneously reconstituted, all in parallel, in a
periodic pattern). Don’t sort of inapproriately reify any of this! Phenomenology-first, as it were!

In any case, for whatever reason, the non-meaning-laden components of the sensory processing pipeline tend to be more
salient to us, especially when we’re deliberately paying attention to sensations, making paying attention to sensations
often seem dumb and pointless.

***

But, provisionally given the above, we can see that body sensations are already, in some sense, meaning-laden, even if
they don’t seem to be, and body sensations heavily influence meaning-making (of course, but perhaps much more so than is
initially intuitive). Further, body sensations, in some sense, influence the sensory processing pipeline itself as well
as the process of meaning-making itself—what we even might usually think of as hardwired cognition or even hardwired
intelligence, itself. Body sensations are the first step in sort of sculpting and meta-sculpting everything, all the
time. Very little is hardwired—I always say the mind is 99% software and 1% hardware, metaphorically. I’m not doing a
good job of unpacking it in this section, but, in some sense, our minds are nothing more than all the experiences we’ve
ever had—and through memory and imagination we can have any experience. And, add two more pieces: the mind is
practically lossless (in that any distinguishable sensory memory can be ultimately recovered) and that the mind is
simultaneously “utterly malleable” (even while being lossless!). And, so then, the degrees of freedom for a mind are
just cosmologically vast, with no prior way of thinking/feeling/behavior set in stone. Note that cosmologically vast
doesn’t mean arbitrary or unconstrained! The “envelope” is nevertheless highly, highly constrained and going from state
to state is exquisitely path-dependent, as mentioned above. This gives gods-eye-view-predictable-and-repeatable
meditation journeys, with a wide variation in concrete details and asymptotic well-fittedness to whatever situations
people might find themselves in.

***

So, in any case, paying attention to body sensations is important. But, there are some practical “buts.”

First, one shouldn’t necessarily focus exclusively on, say, “body” sensations, or, rather non-meaning-laden sensory
inputs or sensations of any kind. The entire experiential envelope participates in the sensory processing pipeline, as
it were (including feedback loops, whether non-meaning-laden, obviously meaningful/knowing or not)—

The order in which one does everything matters. There will be tremendous interleaving of “attention”/awareness in
different “locations” (from body to meaning to etc.) typically, but not always, at a finer and finer grain.

Second, paying more attention to the body is sort of a *phase* (which could be repeating, which could be sort of
periodic, spiraling, nonmonotonic). It’s sort of like, most people are “in their heads,” and have sort of “built up body
awareness (or lack thereof)” suboptimally. And, so, there will be a period of “re-attending” to things (body, memories,
sensory field) in the right order, which will refactor the pipeline, including awareness of sensations, cognition,
meaning, everything. And, during that refactoring, a bunch of things can become salient that sort of “need” to
temporarily become salient, because of path-dependent change, and, over time, things will sort of “reflow,” and most
body sensations (and other sensory processing) will once again become relatively less salient, and/but everything will
be working better, from sensory processing to cognition.

So, it’s less “I need to pay attention to the body much more, and for the rest of my life” and more, “I need to
carefully, correctly, perhaps extensively but in the right way and the right order, pay attention to the body so as to
be able to forget (and enjoy) the body when I want to, along with all sorts of other good things, happening.” And, it’s
less “top-down attending” and more “obliquely doing whatever’s necessary to have body attention be prereflective and
automatic in ways that it’s not already but could be.”

***

So, this was ridiculously roundabout, but, the basis of self-trust is not just in intuition (which can’t get trapped in
infinite regress, among other things) but in the body (and sensory field). Attending to the body, in the right way and
in the right order (interleaved with other things, including reverie and plenty of thinking), eventually refactors
intuition, making it prereflective, broadband, and powerful, and also refactors even the intellect (as well as
preflective sensory processing and much more). This includes more and more resolution of inconsistencies, contradiction,
contention in behavior, antcipation, cognition, “belief,” and more.

In some ways, self-trust is the resolution of just enough inner conflict and the acquisition of just enough (inner and
wordly) skill that one is confident that they can resolve and acquire all the rest, in a way that’s safe enough and good
enough for themselves and others.

And part of that, and only part, is very counterintuitively attending to the body (and plenty of other things) for an
accumulating thousands of hours, where it may initially seem like almost nothing is happening at all, and for long
stretches after, even after some things do start happening. And, with tools like the meta protocol (or in the spirit of
the meta protocol), one can more quickly bootstrap confidence and self-trust that the process is working. And that
self-trust can quickly extend to other areas of life and self-trust in general. (And experimenting and living in the
world is of course also an important component of [gaining] self-trust as well part of the whole point.)

Something not explicitly noted in the above, but implicitly there, is that, at least locally, the mind is *always
spontaneously doing the right thing*. (Choose some evolutionary, physical, or cosmological theory, here.) And the mind
can net-globally do the right thing, too, especially if context and preconditions are set up just a hair on the side of
sufficiency. And this is why, with a few inputs, just a little “grace” (which is usually bad and good mixed together)
like mixed-bag mentors/“mentors” and/or mixed-bag meditation instructions, the whole mind (and one’s entire life) can
kind of unwind and rewind itself in retrospectively and prospectively desired and endorsed ways. And this sponteneity of
(body)mind, is the ultimate basis of self-trust.


but is it meditation? (a dialogue between J and Mark):


J

a couple more things that come to mind maybe for future versions. excuse the ramble-i-ness

do you think it could be useful/important to table set a little bit? something along the lines of (but not necessarily
this, just something in this direction): this will likely feel different from previous meditation you’ve done, if you’ve
done some. i think past versions had something like this. and kind of for the reason I mentioned in […]: I could see
people spending a fair amount of time trying to shoehorn this practice into their prior conception of what meditation
practice is. i guess p2, p8, and p1 stand a good chance of addressing this directly without it having to be written out.
i wonder how useful or not some making this explicit would be. :thinking_face:

and i also wonder if there’s some basic basic theory of mind that is good to mention right off-the-bat. it may very well
not be a good thing, i’m not sure. here’s the kind of theory that might be good imo, for example:

> `there’s like some kind of universal gradient/basin/attractor that the mind/brain is always, always, alway, always
trying to fall down. one single direction, which might be why correct meditation works elegance, free energy
minimization, dunno or

> how the mind is really smart in some ways, sometimes/often moreso than the “personality” (i might be butchering the
> thing but that’s how i remember it)

and lots of little related things like this

for example wrt to the above, knowing stuff like this has made it easier for me to trust that the right things are
happening at times, or trust that my mind can do good things, and stuff like that. depending on the models of mind
people are running on i could expect there to be a lot of self fighting and self flailing and not self trusting in ways
that might be bad. for example, if you’re coming from a tmi practice you might believe that your mind is this thing you
need to wrangle, that you know better than, stuff like that. little bits of theory like this could help people
understand how the practice works, why it’s different than practice they’ve done before, and possibly have the needed
faith to try it out for 100+ hours


J continues

The way I've been orienting to [this protocol versus other meditation protocols] myself recently is not through the
meditation frame (though it is that and becomes that feel again eventually) but through the "going all the way to the
bottom and from first principles as it were figuring out how to use a mind" frame, or something in the ballpark of that

It just cuts through a lot of the "is this meditation", or "am I doing the right thing" stuff, if you forget about
meditation for a couple months and pretend it's not that, or something (At least in my experience)

I guess this is a bit of a tangent now


Mark

Cool. It is really different than [other] meditation [procedures] in a lot of ways. […]


J

yeah. i definitely think it is meditation. i'm probably being critically unappreciative, but there's a way in which
other meditations are more narrow/constrained and this stuff is still meditation but wholeheartedly takes on the whole
mind and every part of it. maybe it's all the same in the limit or something.

the concern is that i think i probably spent something like 50 - 100 hours (total total total total total ballpark)
trying to make [this protocol into] what i understood to be meditation, or at least hours where this was on my mind and
undermining practice, in a way. and even afterwards there have been and has been threads in my mind like "huh this
doesn't feel like meditation so i must be doing something wrong". of course i think a lot of this is par for the course
and part of tacking towards good and tacking towards better models of mind and meditation. like why does it feel wrong?
why is one thing more meditation than another? but maybe with the right upfront expectation setting there's a way to
just nip the shoehorning in a bud and save people time

[…]


Mark

> trying to make this what i understood to be meditation

how does that look? can you say more? want to innoculate (and i'm sorry)


J

so after like n years knowing about tmi and noting and related practices, i had implicit models about how meditation
works. the general general shape of the model was something like: your mind is a tool/machine, and you need to make it
sensitive tool/machine such that one day it can finally pick up on some details of experience that lead to insight. step
1) develop powerful tool [powerful experienced as stable in the case of tmi, and perceptive in the case of noting]. step
2) use tool to examine reality importantly nowhere in this model was there a sense that meaningful progress was being
made up until the point of insight


Mark

so like train tool/build microscope, then use microscope? does that simplify it too much?


J

nope that's pretty much exactly it

Mark

hmm k


J

i'm guessing this is common, but i'm not positive


Mark

i think ingram sort of implies this


J

and there was a model for what made a good microscope too


M

like if you just use your microscope enough


J

i think it was the model of what i thought made a good miscroscope that was especially problematic


Mark

so then ppl like spend 1000 hours examining the blobs behind their closed eyes

> i think it was the model of what i thought made a good miscroscope that was especially problematic


say more?


J

sure. and eventually we should try to figure out why it is possible to have success with that metaphor. like, is it
success in spite of the misconception? or is something else happening? [and ofc not everyone does have success and
stuff]


Mark

> like, is it success in spite of the misconception?

i currently think so

noting is close enough that people can slip into doing the right thing, especially with a teacher who succeeded


J

so as mentioned with both noting and concentration, even tho the skills are different, what a successful microscope
looks like in both cases involves something in the ballpark of mindfulness or "with it ness" "with it ness" that builds
up into long interrupted stretches of "with it ness" over time and so if you're doing one of these practices it's
getting into one of these stretches that makes it feel like you're finally doing it right "fuck, i'm really with the
breath." or "fuck, i'm really with these vibrations" something about sustained continuity of a thing over time seems to
be the thing


Mark

so like almost indiscriminately maxing out continuous contact with bare sensations, sort of?

i guess that's what you said


J

yeah yeah that's in there too

and with this stuff, it doesn't seem like striving for uniterruptedness is important (until it happens on it's own), and
it seems like there's plenty of room for non purely sense stuff too


Mark

(noting that i myself thought exactly all of this. pretty much exactly.)

yeah


Jonathan

and so it didn't really feel like i was developing a microscope

Mark

ah, ok


J

yeah. even people who ahven't meditated before often have a model as it being about "no thinking", or "staying with the
present"-ness all of [that] is distinct from [this protocol]

> (noting that i myself thought exactly all of this. pretty much exactly.)

oh cool! affirming yay

Mark

yup


J

Actually I just kind of remembered something funny. I remember at SFDC in the fall with Shinzen, you were telling [S]
and I something like, "I think the updates that happen leading up to streamentry are as important as streamentry". And I
remember internally thinking: "what do you mean updates before streamentry??" In quite a literal sense I thought
streamentry was like a single belief toggling from off to on (preceded by no updates of significance).

I think this sort of all or nothing thinking is quite common.

[… I]t also bounced off in the most important way because I had no mental model of how practice could work that would
have being patient, locally-oriented, not obsessed with the supramundane as being the correct strategy. The reaction was
something like, "ok […] that's very cool […] but there's still this streamentry insight waiting for me out there and
nothing will be good until that"

So yeah, in many ways, I think for many meditators and nonmeditators, a very big update will be that updates happen
along the way and the mind gets better and more liveable along the way. and what a relieving update too. being super
explicit and not at all sidelining this (as you're doing) will go a long way to that end.

For this all to work, for the claim that updates happen along the way to be credible, one need's a place for those
updates [i.e. mundane insights] to live.

[…]

I'm sure all of [other] teachers would claim that "things are supposed to get better along the way, and if they're not,
you're missing the point." But I blame their implied models of mind and implied models of progress! You can claim that
"things are supposed to get better along the way" but if you're not providing the right model of mind/progress or
otherwise really really emphasizing it, it's just going to bounce out of students brains and sound like hollow wishful
thinking or something. So in summary heh: good models of mind and progress are super duper helpful and consequential to
practice

[…]


practice in daily life or no?:

Some meditation systems emphasize the importance of practicing in the midst of daily life or making daily life part of
the practice.

As opposed to "firewalling" practice, or practicing in a carefully delimited box and forgetting about it at other times,
it can be helpful to reflect or feel into past or future practice in stolen moments. And, it's certainly ok to do a
little bit of practice, self-reflection, gathering oneself in those stolen moments or otherwise interleaved at other
times.

But, generally, it can actually be good to *not* mix practice with the activities of daily life. As in, it's ok to
practice when praticing and to just live when living.

The ultimate goal of the practice is sort of to "get lost in life" (safely, constructively, endorsedly), anyway.

And practicing in daily life or using daily life activities for practice is sort of adding something *extra* to life, an
extra thing, extra metacognition, something. And this can interfere with spontaneous, constructive action.

It can be better to use practice to alter the "upstream causal factors" that indirectly trickle down to affect
experience and behavior and choices, in daily life.

So practice does, short-run and long-run, affect daily life, of course.

And, eventually, practice sort of eats itself:

The lines between practice and daily life *do* blur, *do* mix.

There becomes just one seamless thing, with context dependent, manifold evolving qualities, whether "on the cushion" or
off.

So/but, anyway, here, in this practice system, we're sort of coming at this blurring/mixing, indirectly, from the
practice side, rather than top-down trying to mix practice and daily life directly.


what about concrete/proximal problems?:

[This section was partly inspired and came out of discussion with collaborator k.]

It’s ok to try to or to explore applying meditation to concrete or proximal problems. You might
meditate/will/think/feel/etc. towards their being solved or dissolved, directly, in the context of your practice.

In the course of that, if something starts to grind or jam, just make sure you sort of notice this as quickly as
possible, and then “take your foot of the gas,” gently, fully stop trying, in that particular way you were trying,
before you try something a little different or very different. (This helps to reduce the possibility of a “runaway
proliferation of activity” or “leaving scaffolding or activity behind.” It’d be fine if you do leave stuff behind,
and/but then you’d likely have to clean it up later, someway, somehow. And that’s fine, too; it just might cause
handleable but undesirable problems in the meantime—it can increase the chances of some of the things in the “risks”
section happening, in the worst case.)

And things *will* probably grind or jam, within seconds or minutes, for an early- and middle-stage meditator, because of
the nonarbitrary, structural relatedness of everything “in” the (body)mind. If things weren’t all intertwingled and
dependently interrelated (at first) then one wouldn’t need to meditate! Problems would just sort of spontaneously
unravel, solve, and dissolve themselves. (And they often do already! And, you don’t notice it! Because, it’s just
spontaneously, effortlessly happening for lots of possible problems and desires and hopes and goals that never need to
become problems and desires in the first place! That’s just what the mind does and is trying to do, in some sense, all
the time, for everything, anyway. Sometimes it just needs a little help on the front end, and that’s what meditation
is.)

Meditation is *for* things. Meditation *is* concrete/proximal problem solving, though sometimes the solution involves
going very oblique, very indirect, up to and including one’s entire cosmology, metaphysics, and the very seeming and
experiencing of the world. And things can get rocky when that’s happening. But, sometimes, to solve a very important,
concrete problem, that’s what one ends up needing to do.

Part of why the concrete/proximal problem solving aspect of meditation is deemphasized or dismissed is because direct
problem solving not only kind of tends to quickly grind or jam but because usually the “energy” or “directionality” of
that problem-solving activity is what’s causing or perpetuating the problem in the first place.

There’s a way in which that’s almost tautological or analytic (in the analytic versus synthetic proposition sense): The
problem-solving activity, if crystalized as such, must somehow be trapping or preventing solution pieces inside of
itself, in some sense. Otherwise, the problem would have never become a problema in the first place, in some sense—it
would have somehow been automatically, spontaneously, effortlessly handled at some point in the past. So, while/when a
goal or problem-directedness is fixed/frozen/crystallized, problem solving potentiality is sort of trapped within it.
But, if that goal or problem-directeness can relax, let go, recede, lose momentum, become fluid, then those solution
pieces can be released and sort of mix profitably with the rest of the space, and then suddenly (or
gradually/eventually) the solution might become clear or the problem might dissolve.

So trying to solve some problems “directly,” and trying to solve problems directly with meditation, can sort of be a
trap. But, it’s ok to play with it, and try, because solving and dissolving problems is kind of the point, whether it
happens directly or indirectly.

Note, of course, “dissolving problems” can be a huge space of coming to want different things over time because “you and
your bodymind” decide those things are much better than the things you wanted before, intrinsically, or because lots of
knock-on problems just sort of fall away.

In the meantime, and forever, it’s ok to want money, mansions, anything. It’s ok to want whatever kind of life you want,
and it’s ok to want your life to feel however you want it to feel. (The “endless non-end non-state” can be exciting,
engaging, passionate, interesting, playful…)

The ways in which you’re “hey wait a second,” to any of the above, are part of the inputs to meditation. If you’re
concerned “enlightenment” or mansions or money won’t make you safe or happy, then, through meditation, you might turn
towards having merely “enough” money (which might be a little bit or might be billions), and being the kind of person
that can participate in every more stable and expansive intimate care relationships. And politics. Who knows.

Even if embodying “no-self” and nonduality (or whatever), the system will still be moving towards homeostasis and
procreation (all things being equal) across all time horizons, and all sorts of things interrelated with those.

It’s ok to try to get specific, concrete things, and it’s ok to try to use meditation to get them—especially as one gets
farther along, as the system becomes more and more nonarbitrarily fluid. And sometimes, when directness doesn’t work,
the right thing to do will be to let things go, to incline towards indirect, oblique, provisional, noncommital openness,
when one can, to facilitate the solving and dissolving of one’s problems, in ways that couldn’t be appreciated, pursued,
or conceived, ahead of time.



meta practice:



meta protocol:

Contents (0) Notes (1) Retrospective Evaluation of Happening and Doing (2) Dyadic Tight Feedback Loop

(0) Notes

(*) Note that you can also interleave/weave these questions (or the spirit of these questions) with[/into] a main
meditation practice as you're doing it. (*) Don't force the questions below. If you're mind doesn't want to answer them,
then don't make your mind answer them. (*) You don't need to get complete answers or verbal answers to the questions.
Just good-faith try/intend to answer, being willing to release the *how* of how you're getting the answer or answering.
When in doubt, let go and start over or let go completely. Let you mind have time and space to answer the questions
however it wants. The mind might answer by doing something rather than answering the question, specifically. (*) You
don't need to ask the questions below verbally or discretely, though it's good to experiment with that first. You can
also cast your mind over the questions or the memory of the questions, sequentially, semi-sequentially, or all together,
all at once. Try to vary how you're accessing the questions, verbally/sequentially versus all at once, and the degrees
in between. (*) There is a "meta meta protocol" [sic] which is applying this protocol to itself. There are contextually
better and worse ways to use this meta protocol and there are better and worse interpretations of how to use it. The
"meta meta protocol" can help you move towards better and better interpretations and uses. (*) Note that the meta
protocol can be used for other things besides meditation, such as problem solving, planning, or really anything, mental
or physical. (*) Lots of things have the “flavor” or spirit of the meta protocol, without looking exactly like the
below. You might feel like you’re “not doing the meta protocol” but you actually are! Any time you’re wondering whether
you doing the right thing, or if a good or bad thing happened, or you’re asking other people and dialoguing about
it—that’s “going meta.” It doesn’t have to have the exact form of the below and it doesn’t have to be done explicitly.
(*) You might simply ask, what are all the options/affordances, here, and which might be good right now to pick? (*)
Intuition! Feeling! Body! You can ask the questions with the body, the mind, or the bodymind, or anything, or
everything. And you can listen/feel for answers with the body, the mind, or the bodymind, or anything, or everything.


(1) Retrospective Evaluation of Happening and Doing

Happening What is currently generally *happening* when you meditate? What of that is in some sense seemingly
	contextually good, as far as you can currently tell? How did you come to have this/these impression(s), as far as
	you can currently tell? What of that is in some sense seemingly contextually bad, as far as you can currently tell?
	How did you come to have this/these impression(s), as far as you can currently tell? What of that are you currently
	unsure of whether it might be contextually good or bad? How might you come to know better what of that is
	contextually good or bad? Doing What do you currently generally *do* when you meditate? What of that is in some
	sense seemingly contextually good, as far as you can currently tell? How did you come to have this/these
	impression(s), as far as you can currently tell? What of that is in some sense seemingly contextually bad, as far as
	you can currently tell? How did you come to have this/these impression(s), as far as you can currently tell? What of
	that are you currently unsure of whether it might be contextually good or bad? How might you come to know better
	what of that is contextually good or bad?


(2) Dyadic Tight Feedback Loop 

Online Data Collection, with an Observer/Coach/Consultant/Friend: As you’re meditating, simultaneously interleave verbal
	reporting of (a) what’s happening and (b) what you’re doing, all of this just as best you can and makes sense. So,
	as best you can and makes sense, don’t force anything, you can’t do it wrong, what’s happening and what are you
	doing? Start now. Offline Analysis, While Taking a Break from Meditating: What of that was in some sense seemingly
	contextually good, as far as you can currently tell? How did you come to have this/these impression(s), as far as
	you can currently tell? What of that was in some sense seemingly contextually bad, as far as you can currently tell?
	How did you come to have this/these impression(s), as far as you can currently tell? What of that are you currently
	unsure of whether it might have been contextually good or bad? How might you come to know better what of that was/is
	contextually good or bad? For what’s seemingly contextually good, as far as you can currently tell, how might or
	will you keep doing it? And under what conditions might it or might it not be good to stop, if ever? For what’s
	seemingly contextually bad, as far as you can currently tell, what might or might not be good to do about that, and
	when or under what conditions, as far as you can currently tell? Offline Generative, While Taking a Break from
	Meditating: How are you currently coming to know, or, how might you come to know, about additional possibly
	contextually good things to do, that you’re not currently doing, or not doing at all the times they might be good to
	do, or have never done before, as far as you can currently tell? What are some things you’ve never done before that
	might be good to do, as far as you can currently tell? How might you come to do those possibly good things at
	possibly good times, as far as you can currently tell?


collaborator formulations:


collaborator formulation 1: (mh)

so, a quick rephrase of the meta protocol:

evaluation of happening and doing:

- start meta protocol, which kind of meta protocol feels [yes good ahh satisfying correct necessary-but-hard useful
  globally-good globally-ahhh]? is it the whole-body gesture, scan, interrogation,
  welcoming-of-an-answer-even-if-it-doesn’t-come? which....wait and see...

- watch the doing/being/is/thus-ness, look around for/invite/welcome/find/discover/glance sideways at/whatever is there
  that is good/potentially good/felt-sense-of-satisfaction

- look for/watch/investigate global risk/danger/pain-i’m-not-ready-for/things-i’ll-be-ready-for-soon/etc

- trace back for hows/whys/stories/dissolution of stories/mechanisms/not-knowing-ness/okay-ness/not-okayness

- welcome/wait for/investigate/build/construct/allow/whatever a next step if there is a next step/next question/next
  state/shift in priorities/etc

[they comment further:]

I think I’m getting a better handle on “right place, right time.” it’s interesting how the definition of “good” shifts
according to some kind of need, even when I don’t know what the need is there’s this all-inclusive okay-ness thing but
so many fine-grained variations in what kinds of “good” and “bad” and “locally vs. globally good-or-bad” are available
or necessary in any given moment

[…]

there’s something like...the whole system keeps shifting around the definition of “good” (placeholder for the real
thing), different “senses” of good/bad/?? seem useful locally at different times, but there’s definitely Something I’m
moving towards...but I can’t actually pin _that_ thing down

like, moderate confidence that all of the different “flavors” of “good/better” and “bad/worse” are integral to the
thing, but no verbal/explicit? knowledge of what the Big Thing actually Is

or, well

a lot of me/“the bodymind” seems to have an answer here. and actual knowledge about what the thing is. but the part of
me that explains it to myself and can actually explain it to other people is like ??????

where before it was like I was getting some kind of representation or map of good/better/bad/worse/??, it feels like a
whole bunch of Knowing and Not Knowing has opened up around the territory and it is...resistant to representative
explanation/maps

or, just not compatible with them



meta meta protocol:

[minimally edited placeholder transcript; 1:1 message reply] I want to do something like not over or under sell the meta
protocol, like, one thing that's important is that one should sort of also apply The Meta protocol to itself so sort of
a Meta Meta protocol, and I'm sure there's better and worse ways to kind of weave it into the meditation practice
itself.

I know that it's as you know, it's sort of written as like a separate thing, but you picked up immediately—I’m doing the
same thing where I'm sort of naturally weaving the spirit of it into the main practice itself in terms of—that was not
under selling it—but there's also a thing about not overselling it.

I've recently hammered: meta protocol, meta protocol, meta protocol. I think that's right, and I did say, like, “If
non-forcily available” because it can be a thing that’s not good for the mind to do at particular times. And I think
that'll be like pretty obvious; the mind just sort of won't be able to do it or it'll feel forcy or effortful so one
shouldn’t, just like everything else.

It shouldn't be forcy, as with the main practice. One is interpreting the instructions and applying them in contingent
idiosyncratic ways at least in some ways. So this is where the Meta Meta thing comes in.

As with the main practice, let go, hold it loosely, experiment; don’t prematurely reify ontological elements or
commitments that seem to be implied by the text.



solo practice: (“main protocol”)



preliminary/auxiliary practices:

The preliminary/auxiliary practices are sometimes useful to explore before and concurrently with the main practices,
especially main practice p2.

These practices won’t take you all the way and can even tie you in knots, but they can get things going and sometimes
unstick things. They are presented in no particular order.

Consider creating for yourself and/or submitting your own preliminary/auxiliary practices for inclusion in this
document. Submission could be very useful to other people. If you wished that it had been here, instead of you needing
to discover it, or you just think it’d be useful to other people, please submit. Preliminary practices are intended to
be unsystematized, ad hoc, a little bit vague, brief, and jargon-free. Ideally they are titled with a short, imperative
phrase, but that isn’t necessary. Your submissions will be indicated by your initials or pseudonymous initials (please
choose/indicate).

[People besides me who've submitted preliminary/auxiliary are credited with parenthetical initials. Sometimes other
people help with significant curation as well, including (h) and others. If a parenthetical initials contain an
asterisk, then the original submission has been lightly modified in some way.]

Don’t take these too seriously. Don’t reify them. They might or might not point to deep, metaphysical truths. If they
happen to, it’s probably not in the way you initially think. You might or might not have to intermittently throw some or
all of these away, forget them, in order to make progress.

You don’t have to do all or any these. Eventually you’ll throw almost all of them away, or at least they’ll be
essentialized and seamlessly convolved with so much.

Something being in a preliminary/auxiliary practice isn’t committing to any particular ontology. Take these as
experiential games, dialogues between words and experience, physical or mental action and result.

Because the preliminary/auxiliary practices are an ad hoc, open-ended list, the current set of practices became too
large to be manageably contained in the current document.

See

auxiliary_names_only.txt

for a bare list of the current names of the preliminary/auxiliary practices. You can skim this list quickly for ones
that look interesting.

See

auxiliary.txt

for the actual preliminary/auxiliary practices.

Contemporary meditators sometimes dismiss the preliminary/auxiliary practices (and sometimes, based on this, the entire
document/protocol), because they seem "too intellectual" or "too conceptual." There's a few things to say, here. First,
experimenting with versions of these that do sometimes tend to be too "top-down," too "heady"/conceptual/intellectual,
at first, can help the system learn how to do "bottom-up"/automatic/spontaneous versions. Many of the p/a practices are
pointing at phenomena that spontaneously precede insights.

Contemporary meditators sometimes also dismiss preliminary/auxiliary for being "too therapeutic." If meditation is the
total transformation of (body)mind, then anything is fair game and potentially relevant, and ordering matters. Sometimes
a meditator will be "stuck," then go talk to a therapist about something seemingly unrelated, and then be "unstuck" in
their meditation practice. To the degree that a meditator can be "unstuck" "on the cushion", their practice will precede
more systematically and efficiently. It's all the same system, and "mundane" insights can bottleneck "the big stuff" as
viewed through traditional maps or contemporary lenses.

All that being said, sometimes the long list of preliminary/auxiliary practices can just seem paralyzingly overwhelming.
"Do I have to do them all?" No! Explore the ones that look interesting or resonant. You will generalize from these. If
you get bored or you're not "stuck," don't use them. The idea is to do just enough that you begin to generalize towards
finding new degrees of freedom and the right high-dimensional, deeply personal and situated things to do, on your own.
Eventually the mind becomes fully self-generative and "omni-directional." The preliminary/auxiliary practices are
intended to facilitate that bootstrap, not to be a laborious and exhaustive set of practices that need to be completed
before moving on.

An analogy used elsewhere is that the preliminary/auxiliary practices can be thought of as playing the scales, as in
when learning to play a musical instrument. It's not a perfect analogy, but it might be a helpful one. One doesn't play
all possible scales and one doesn't want to mistake the scales for sheet music performance or jazz. Though, sometimes,
they're an excellent and helpful/healing/something thing to do.

Most people aren't exercising all the degrees of freedom of their minds--there's a way in which it can be hard to see
all the different things one might do in any particular moment. (The "all you see is all there" bias.) Lists like can
help people to fill out their "missing degrees of freedom." Almost everyone has a speckle pattern of blind spots, for
things they could do but don't spontaneously think of doing, at times where it'd be helpful (e.g. in daily life, or in
reflection, or while journaling... or while doing p2!)

Further, "generalization" runs "deep," to ever-finer things one might do with ever-finer nuance and variation. Again,
one eventually goes "beyond" the preliminary/auxiliary practices, though even "meditation masters" will dip back into
the list, every so often, for all sorts of reasons.

(Degrees of freedom and fine-grain-ness have relationships to the classical concept of "pliability.")

Finally, for any given person, sooner or later, they will experiment with a preliminary/auxiliary practice and find that
it's jarring, grindy, disruptive, something. Not all practices will be net good for people at all times, and plenty will
be potentially detrimental. (Maybe only a tiny, different fraction of them will be useful for any particular person.) As
one progresses in meditation, less and less "top-down" or "random" "mental actions" (not to inappropriately reify
anything of that) will be useful! It's ok to put preliminary/auxiliary practices down and never pick them up again (or
to never try some of them at all, ever), and so on.

Meditation is global wayfinding. Everything you do changes you. Have every degree of freedom at your disposal in the
service of better and better--the right things, in the right order, a the right time, ultimately beyond reason and
conception (though reason and conception are still good, before, sometimes during, and after).

If the list is overwhelming, the meta protocol can help bootstrap intuitive navigation and selection of practices, from
the preliminary/auxiliary practices and of course what to do, when, with respect to the entire protocol. It's ok to
choose randomly and experiment. There is time. It's included in the "10,000 hours."

Again, the preliminary/auxiliary practices are sometimes useful to explore before and concurrently with the main
practices, especially main practice p2.



main practice(s):

introduction:

Unlike the preliminary/auxiliary practices, which are ad hoc and open-ended, the main practices are designed to be a
seamless unity, a seamless, closed set. As with the meta protocol, the verbal rendering of the “main practices,” in this
document, could be considered one possible schematization out of many. That is, there are multiple ways that the main
practices could be validly rendered into words, using maybe completely different (or overlapping) words, for each
rendering. As always, it’s important to keep in mind that this entire document is a telephone game, pointing at bodymind
practices, progressions, and ways of being that are “beneath” words. That being said, one hopes that this rendering
(eventually), and other renderings, are in some sense “relatively losslessly complete.” That is, this rendering and
other renderings will hopefully retain (point to) the same amount of “essential complexity,” without loss of important
and unifying detail and sense. Ideally, each rendering of the main practices would be, in some sense, a “complete,
seamless, closed set.”

“Complete” (successfully rendered so, or not), conceptually or otherwise, note, though, that different people will use
different main practices in greatly different proportions, time-wise, e.g. many people may spend much more time with p2
than the others. And, something like the meta protocol, or the “real thing behind it,” your intuition, should be the
final arbiter of what one could/“should” be doing at any given time, as per usual. No magical button pushing, here, or
anywhere. By exploring each of the main practices, and engaging the meta protocol with respect to them, you must come to
implicitly, and sometimes explicitly, understand their interrelationship and appropriate usage, for yourself, on your
terms, in your own concepts and words. You must find the “real” practice(s), the correct thing(s), behind the words
below.

All that being said, some people have taken a preliminary stab at pithy glosses for each of the current main practices,
as a way to remember what they are and as a way to bootstrap an understanding of how they might fit together and support
each other. At a later time, I will work out how to explicate more of the principles behind their design.


Example glosses by a collaborator (br):

p1 - conceptual clarity p2 - do and will good things if you can p3 - become aware of everything without changing it p4 -
temporarily emptiness/nothingness p5 - also become aware of everything without changing it? p6 - temporarily make
everything better p7 - temporarily release everything p8 - 243 questions p9 - visualize the perfect day p10 - [not
submitted]


Another collaborator (d) offers these relationships:

I think of p3 as more inviting, each point modifying or coming after the first; and p5 as keeping things that are
already there still. p3 to me is more about turning up new things and p5 is about stilling turbulence

For p3, parts or feels can be threatened by knowing they will immediately become subject to p2 immediately upon being
grasped

For p5, you can turn up things and create turbulence so that everything is moving so fast it becomes so slippery that
you can't do anything about them.


My response to the above collaborators:

p3 is yeah sort of maybe (very) slow, soaking concentration-flavored noting practice, that self-generates new noting
labels over time

p1 is more conceptual grain and fluidity than anything else

p5, very loosely, yeah could be considered a “continuous”/“indiscrete” [sic] version of p3, but it teaches a bunch of
different things than p3, too, around stability, change, “grasping” (maybe in non traditional sense) and control

p3 is also a different take on “learning how to not change things” (as well as the limits of that) versus p2 which is
more change oriented (though right thing right time)

p6 is sort of a “continuous”/“indiscrete” [sic] version of p2

p7 also has a bunch of relations to different “halves” of p2


Another collaborator (h/H) notes:

[p3 is] like an antidote to (what seems to me to be) the strong doingness/acting-upon-ness of p2


***

In general, as mentioned in other places, if things feel stuck or “jammy,” or things become “forcy”/“force-y”, it can be
good to change which main practice you’re doing, to switch to a preliminary/auxiliary practice, to engage the meta
protocol or meta meta protocol, to change postures, to take a walk, to take a break, to do the most minimal, personal
thing in the (meta) spirit of the meta protocol, etc.

Finally, H notes:

>>>
i’ve recommended the prot to several people now, and i notice that each time i do i include some kind of
disclaimer/warning about the language of especially the main practices. like “don’t think too hard, don’t spin your
wheels trying to understand every caveat & get it all in your head at once.” i’m not sure it’s best to do that, but i
want to sort of encourage people to sit with it even if it is overwhelming or doesn’t make any sense in the beginning.
“just let it wash over your subconscious” <-- problematic phrase maybe & i haven’t actually said that to anyone, but
it’s kind of what i’m thinking <<<

The current renderings of the main practices are below.


practices:

p0: [Will that you become someone who uses the practice regularly and effectively to achieve the goals of the practice.]


p1: [old names: Elemental Analysis, Comprehensive Elemental Analysis]

1. Incline towards producing one of (1a) a logical argument/deduction/derivation (standalone or possibly including a
narrativized explanation), [What implies/entails this/X? What does X/this imply/entail? Why X? What is the reason for X?
What follows from X? X=?] (1b) a description of a causal mechanism, [What caused this/X? What does this/X cause? X=?]
[How does that work?] [(1/2) What’s going on? What’s going on, there? What’s going on, here? What’s going on, out there?
What’s going on, in here?] (1c) a description of some spatiotemporal sensations/experience, [What is before this/X? What
is after this/X? What’s next? What is adjacent to this/X? What qualities does this/X have? X=?] [(2/2) What’s going on?
What’s going on, there? What’s going on, here? What’s going on, out there? What’s going on, in here?] (1d) an
explanation of a phenomenon and possibly alternate credible explanations of that phenomenon (1e) an evaluation or
appraisal of something (1f) instructions for achieving something (1g) description of an ideal, endorsement (1h)
description of a goal state (1i) a description of a dynamical first-person perspective/experience (your present
experience, experiential memory, inferred of another, or imagined), including mental, sensory, and somatic experience
(1j.1) a question and possibly and answer, or (1j.2) a topic/subject and possibly content subsumed by that topic/subject
(1k) a problem and possibly a solution (1l) some (or as exhaustively as you can) of your “actual/deepest/truest” (a)
beliefs and (b) expectations—good, bad, and ugly, beautiful, endorsed, disendorsement,and relevant into words, in your
“heart of hearts,” “throat of throats,” “gut of guts,” “genitals of genitals,” “sacrum of sacrums,” “perineum of
perineums,” etc.: the beliefs and expectations and representations of the mind and body. (1m) some (or as exhaustively
as you can) of your plans, intentions, willing, goals (1n) a meaningful story (1o) a meaningful autobiographical
detailed excerpt or lifelong summary (1p) a plan for achieving something (1q) a list of that which you
desire/thirst/crave, hope for, wish for, long for, etc. (1r) a list of that which you fear (1s) a list of that which you
love (1t) a list of that which you hate (1u) a story/fantasy/narrative/scenario that is (a) exciting (and/or otherwise
good e.g. uplifting or psychological) and/or (b) sexually arousing and/or (c) evocative if connection/intimacy/safety
(1v) counterfactuals: for something that went one way or could have gone a way or might go a way or will go a way, how
it could that have, did, or will go/gone a different way, elaborate on that, and what changed for that to be the case
(1w) positive examples of something (things that are examples of X) as different from each other as possible, negative
examples of that something (things that are examples of not-X) as different from each other as can be and as minimally
different from positive examples of X in as many different ways as can be (1x) actions, doings; things you’re doing
right now, volitionally or nonvolitionally, as broadly conceived as possible (1y) an personal
inability/can’t/powerlessness and possibly a believable way to acquire that ability (1z) a “further purpose” a “for what
you are doing something”; “I am doing/striving for X for/because”; “X is good because…” (1z1) a memory (1z2) any type of
writing you want for any purpose. (1z3) your motivations or reasons, beliefs, knowings, understandings, or expectations
for or underlying the actions, doings; things you’re doing right now, volitionally or nonvolitionally, as broadly
conceived as possible, as exhaustively or usefully as possible
2. Get down (think or write down) as little or as much material as comes easily, even just a single relevant word or
   phrase. (And you can also patiently compose and/or revise as you go, or set up an outline structure to fill in, or do
   lots of messy freewriting, or a combination…)
3. Choose, from the material you produced, (3a) a word, (3b) a phrase, (3c) a sentence, or (3d) a boundary (e.g. between
two sentences; this can be stylized as the last word and punctation of a sentence and the first word of a subsequent
sentence) from the material you produced.
4. Lift it out, while remembering its context, and you might put an equals sign to the right of it.
5. Now, on the righthand side of the equals sign, say the same thing using more words than on the left side of the
   equals sign. It’s ok if you produce something partial, imperfect, or nothing.
6. Now, you might return to the original material for more content to repeat the exercise, or take something from the
   zoom/expansion/analysis you just did and zoom/expand/analyze further.
7. Feel free to refactor, revise, expand, reboot the original material as much or as little as you’d like.
8. For anything you produce, be willing to throw it all away, plan to throw it away, be willing to forget for something
   better in the future. Don’t push, don’t force, don’t strain. Let the whole thing go. Let the whole thing move and
   flow.
9. You can also, and this is recommended, create new wholes. For example, if X = M + R + T, and, Y = Q + G + V, then
take, say, R and G. And, do this: “Z = ? = R + G.” Now, what is “Z”, what is that “?” between Z and R+ G? In other
words, instead of putting things on the left hand side of the equal sign and then putting more things on the right hand
side of the equals sign—instead, first put things on the right hand side of the equals sign and then put fewer things on
the left hand side of the equals sign. Find new wholes and larger contexts. You might find wholes contained in larger
wholes contained in larger wholes… 9b. You might play with this template:

[this/these] whole(s) Y is/are/contain(s)/= [this/these] parts M[, F…] + “just exactly/precisely [this/these
aforementioned]/and nothing else”

That is, M and F are known; you have some words for them. Now, what is Y? What are some words for Y?

9c. Another kind of inverse is adding a subscript to the word on the left hand side of the equals sign and then looking
for definitions for the other subscript. For example, you might have “suffering =“ and maybe before you even try to fill
in the right hand side, you might do:

suffering_1 = suffering_2 = suffering_3 = and so on.

You might ask, what is everything I could possibly mean by this word (or phrase) “suffering”/X?

In this way, the word “suffering” can become more detached and flexible from the underlying language, while at the same
time making each use of the word more precise. The subscripts do not have to be numbers; they can be anything that helps
to differentiate which meaning/usage/sense of the word that you mean. That might be times or durations or conditions and
so forth. [See also General Semantics for more on the idea of “indexing.”]

10. Also, consider intensional multischematism. For example, you might say that the same M can be referred to by single
word R and single word H. That is R and H have different meanings/intensions but they refer or point to the same thing
or set of things. Further, R = G + H + T and X = V + W + Q. That is, (G + H + T) and (V + W + Y) each have different
meanings, but correspond to R and X, respectively. Further, you might notice that, say, T and W, while using different
words and meaning different things, in fact refer to the same thing(s), have the same extension. Another way of saying
things like this is that the concept M, or that which directly represents M, or <M>, refers or applies to M using the
word “M”. Or, you might say that both <M> and <K> refer or apply to the same extension; “M” and “K” refer to M and K
which are actually the same. In our syntax and semantics, here, M = K. Example a: This M and this K are the same
(thing). [not just the same type of thing. <this M> and <this K> corefer to M (which is K) and K (which is M).] Example
b: All Gs are also Hs.

[note that the above is ambiguous as to whether X, Y, Z, etc. are “bound” or “unbound” for any given X in the
language/wrting above]


Examples:

Example 1a: X = The cat sat on the mat. Example 1b: Y = cat in X = furry animal + … Example 1c: Z = furry in Y =
experientially noncontiguous nonhomogenous light nonpunctate/distributed pressure when touched gently Example 1d: Q =
noncontiguous in Z = mediacy and absence = missing immediate relations = a proper subset of immediate relations from a
particular designated/delimited closed/finite set Example 2a: T = rippling water = directionality backflows dappled
light dark traveling shimmers twinkle flecks arc chase over under undulate Example 3a: R = The last thing was cheese. We
find that in these cases… Example 3b: M = [cheese.] [We] in R = …summary signpost implication… Example 4: B = ? = cat +
dog; B = ?; B = a partial set of quadrupedal mammals, those things that [for my purposes…]…


Places likely worth investigating:

1. Where something seemingly X somehow leads to (or somehow depends on) something seemingly Y, or vice versa. (e.g. when
   doing something bad is good or when doing something good is bad)
2. Where something is seemingly somehow X and Y at the same time.
3. Where something is seemingly somehow X and Y at different times.
4. Where something is seemingly somehow either X or Y conditionally. X, Y = a) true, false b) good, bad c)
existent/present, nonexistent/absent d) necessary/unconditional/noncontingent, conditional/contingent e)
possible/conceivable, impossible/inconceivable f) simple/nonpartful, complex/composite g) unified/whole/connected,
separate/plural/multiple h) before or after, synchronous i) veridical, nonveridical j) beautiful, ugly k) that is
something that has some attribute or property, that doesn’t have that same attribute or property


Further notes: (*) You might also write/think/say things (assertions) and then incline towards generating relevant
(apparent, seeming, believed, thought, felt, wondered, imagined, suspected, endorsed, something…) counterexamples or
contradictions to those things. And then use the things and the counterexamples or contradictions to improve on the
original thing or to write a better thing not subject to the original counterexamples or contradictions. (*) Some
additional good concepts, semi-separately, are “error correction,” “counterfactual,” “counterexample…” (*) Try also: not
X = [pick things and see if they’re in or out, let this change anything] (*) Consider swapping out the =/equals sign
above with things like: is, means, signifies, is equivalent to, ~/sort of equals; maybe equals; could equal; is; is
essentially; could be conceived as; could be construed as; could be stipulated as; could be schematized as; could be
conveniently stipulated as; boils down to; could have a good enough for now/here definition of; is/can be defined as;
most people think of this like/as; is like… (*) In addition to =/equals and so forth, you can of course try using the
particular word or phrase in a sentence or sentences. (*) If you write down assertions anywhere, e.g. as premises or
points in an argument, you might ad hoc or systematically look for counterexamples. You might also, ad hoc or
systematically, explore objections that others might raise to the/those assertion(s).


p2: will = will(/intend/plan) [that P]; do something volitional that alters expectations for future in a specific way;
willing[/intending/planning/expecting/intent [to produce (an) effect (that)]; goal, purpose, for-what-purpose,
for-what-further-good(ness)-If-any, for-ness, in-the-service-of acting/doing/do =
do/act/cause/maintain/enable/incept/start/prevent/block/stop/end/facilitate/retard/stabilize/change/think/know/sense/judge/evaluate/
compare/differentiate/hear/see/smell/taste/look/listen/appreciate/enjoy/contemplate/imagine/grasp/accumulate/suffer/think/feel/have
part
in/querying/asking/wondering/imagining/storytelling/narrating/what-if-ing/solving/solutioning/what-would-they-do-ing/questioning/assessing/judging/evaluating/participate
in/push/pull/raise/lower/attend/image/envision/visualize/interrupt/preempt/interleave/substitute/switch/meaning-making/meaning-dissolving,
[language-ing, say-ing, word-ing, verbalizing, phrase-ing, sentence-ing, meaning-ing,] experimenting, waiting,
observing, interrupting A Background intention: • For which it’s good to do so and you can do so, will that you become
aware of potential and actual willing, doing, faith/forbearance, and release that is or will be currently good to become
aware of. And, simultaneously, for which it’s good to do so and you can do so, will that you do not become aware of
potential and actual willing that is or will be currently bad to become aware of. Will Instructions Part 1: • If you
become aware that it would be good to directly and immediately will [in such or such and thus a manner/sense/way] that
or something like or in the neighborhood of [proposition] P at or during a particular time/moment/instant or
interval/duration, and, at or during that particular time/moment/instant or interval/duration, you can do so, and it’s
still good to do so, then do so; allow or participate in that happening. • If you become aware that it would be bad to
directly and immediately will [in such or such and thus a manner/sense/way] that or something like or in the
neighborhood of [proposition] P at or during a particular time/moment/instant or interval/duration, and, at or during
that particular time/moment/instant or interval/duration, you can do so, and it’s still good to do so, then don't do so
(don't start doing so or stop doing so); have the [minimal] absence of that willing; allow or participate in that
happening. • If you become aware that it would in some sense have been good to do so but you can’t (a) will or can’t (b)
have the absence of willing that or something like or in the neighborhood of some particular [proposition] P, at or
during a particular time/moment/instant or interval/duration, then stop trying completely, will that you have the
absence of willing that P and ultimately release even that; allow or participate in that happening. Will Instructions
Part 2 (the “opposite” or “absence” or “antidote” of/to will):
• If you become aware that it would be good to have faith [re faith: it or something will work out; something agentic or inevitable or spontaneous causally working on your behalf—the rest of you, or deeper parts of you, or entropic dissipation, or causal law, or the minimization of free energy, or god, or the entire experiential field, Buddha nature, synchronicity, something that you don’t directly and immediately identify as “volitional-you-proper” is figuring it out for you and changing you] or acceptance or forbearance or [even] resignation about something relative to your fate/destiny/inevitability/choicelessness/expectation, and you can do so, surrender into, or surrender into facing that[(temporarily?) (locally or globally) abdicate responsibility ][(temporarily?) (locally or globally) disclaim volitionality][release preconceptions], forget, dream, daydream, fantasize, reverie, entrance, be moved, be drawn towards, have experience, non-effort, non-force, forcelessness, effortlessness, let [it] relax, let [it] recede, let it undo itself, dream, get lost, be lost, forget, allow, surrender, suffer, free-associate, be confused, be uncertain, be out of control, let go, ‘controlled/channelized “falling backwards [into]”)’, give up, fail, give up completely be overtaken, be overwhelmed, be undone, be overcome, fail, give up, fail forever, give up completely, give up forever, forget, forget forever, forget temporarily, forget permanently. Easy in the harness.  
• If you become aware that it would be bad to have faith or forbearance or resignation or surrender or giving up, etc.
about something relative to your fate/destiny/inevitability/choicelessness/expectation[e.g.][(temporarily?) (locally or
globally) abdicate responsibility ][(temporarily?) (locally or globally) disclaim volitionality], to forget, dream,
hypnogogia, entrance, be moved, be drawn towards, have experience, non-effort, non-force, forcelessness, effortlessness,
‘controlled/channelized “falling backwards [into]”, fall-backwards-into, fall-forwards-backwards-into)’ […], etc., and
you can (not) do so, do not surrender to that, don’t do that. [e.g./for example maybe: fight, resist, will, try
everything, try different things, go back to the drawing board, exhaust every possibility, give it everything you have,
try more things, etc., or not, or don’t] • If you find you can’t do one of the two above, then stop trying completely,
will that you have the absence of trying and ultimately release even that; allow or participate in that happening.
Action Instructions Part 1: • If you become aware that it would be good to directly and immediately do [in such or such
and thus a manner/sense/way] that or something like or in the neighborhood of
[action/behavior/doing/self-happening—do/act/cause/maintain/enable/incept/start/prevent/block/stop/end/facilitate/retard/stabilize/change/think/know/sense/judge/evaluate/
compare/differentiate/hear/see/smell/taste/look/listen/appreciate/enjoy/contemplate/imagine/grasp/accumulate/suffer/feel/check/test/try/experiment/have-part-in/querying/asking/wondering/imagining/storytelling/narrating/what-if-ing/solving/solutioning/what-would-they-do-ing/questioning/assessing/judging/evaluating
… participating
in/push/pull/raise/lower/attend/image/envision/visualize/interrupt/preempt/interleave/substitute/switch/meaning-making/meaning-dissolving,
[language-ing, say-ing, word-ing, verbalizing, phrase-ing, sentence-ing, meaning-ing,] experimenting, waiting,
observing, interrupting] A at or during a particular time/moment/instant or interval/duration, and, at or during that
particular time/moment/instant or interval/duration, you can do so, and it’s still good to do so, then do so; allow or
participate in that happening. [Selecting from space of all possible actions…] • If you become aware that it would be
bad to directly and immediately do [in such or such and thus a manner/sense/way] that or something like or in the
neighborhood of [action/behavior/doing/self-happening/etc.] A at or during a particular time/moment/instant or
interval/duration, and, at or during that particular time/moment/instant or interval/duration, you can (not) do so, and
it’s still good to (not) do so, then don't do so (don't start doing so or stop doing so); have the [minimal] absence of
that doing [A]; allow or participate in that happening. • If you become aware that it would have in some sense been good
to do so but you can’t (a) do or can’t (b) have the absence of doing that or something like or in the neighborhood of
some particular [action/behavior/doing/self-happening] A, at or during a particular time/moment/instant or
interval/duration, then stop trying completely, will that you have the absence of doing A and ultimately release even
that; allow or participate in that happening. Action Instructions Part 2 (the “opposite” or “absence” or “antidote”
of/to action): • If you become aware that it would be good to (instead) revert/have become
labile/undo/invert/reverse/inverse [operation]/release/“incomplete”/let go
of/redo-to-undo/replay-to-undo/revisit-to-undo/return-to-to-undo/juxtapose-to-undo/allow-to-undo/dream-to-undo/reverie-to-undo/do-to-undo/go-true-backwards/go-perfect-backwards/‘controlled/channelized
“falling backwards [into]”; fall-backwards-into, fall-forwards-backwards-into)’ the immediate effects of some particular
acting/doing A, and you can do so, then do so; allow or participate in that happening. • If you become aware that it
would be bad to
revert/have-become-labile/undo/invert/reverse/inverse-[operation]/release/“incomplete”/let-go-of/de-reify/un-reify/‘controlled/channelized
“falling backwards [into]”)’ the immediate effects of some particular acting/doing A, and you can (not) do so, then
don't do so (don't start doing so or stop doing so); allow or participate in that (not) happening. • If you become aware
that it would have in some sense been good to revert or have something become labile (or not) but you can’t, then stop
trying completely, will that you have the absence of such and ultimately release even that; allow or participate in that
happening.

Notes: (*) good; cf. ok, good, better, best (*) bad; cf. bad, worse, worst (*) The order in which you do things matters.
Some things will be bad to do now but good to do later and vice versa. (*) A “doing” or “willing” can be any of
atomic/punctate, a discrete/bounded interval/duration, or a semi-indefinite/ongoing modulated continuity/continuousness
[“modulated continuous/unbroken application”]. (*) Sometimes, rather than stopping (or not doing) a bad thing and
starting a good thing, it can be good to make changes to improve the bad thing, to make it better. (*) Sometimes a
composite “doing” or “willing” will be bad or good, e.g. a willing that has one or more part 1’s and one or more part
2’s all happening simultaneously (in different “places” or “locations”). [e.g. “controlled or channelized falling
backwards”, “surrender or have faith in the midst of stuck-forwards-ness”] (*) Sometimes a complex combination of
willing and not willing and acting and not acting all together at the same time will be good or bad. (e.g. “deliberately
don’t do X [e.g. everything that hasn’t worked or has stopped working or has had mixed results] or actively refrain from
doing X plus have faith”) (*) Summary outline: good/can presence of will do; bad/can presence of will don’t; can’t then
stop; good/can absence of will do; bad/can absence of will don’t; can’t then stop; good/can presence of action do;
bad/can presence of action don’t; can’t then stop; good/can absence/undo action do; bad/can absence/undo action don’t;
can’t then stop. (*) Active willing and doing can be a continuous, experimental molding of propositions and actions or
will and acting as such, rather than stopping and starting bad and good willing and doing. Stopping and starting good
and bad willing and doing, and so forth, as specified above, is good, too. (*) Will and doing can be as simple or
complex as is good and can have qualifiers or “guards,” e.g. “will that P via(/by way of first Q[, then E then H), and
including that no bad second-order effects happen, including but not limited to these T, V, F…” and that complexity (and
simplicity) can be explicit/verbal, liminally verbal, “hidden” in the “implicit” part of an explicit proposition, as it
were (making no ontological commitments about minds the existence of propositions), or fully
nonverbal/implicit/felt/etc. One can specify the “how,” more or less concretely or abstractly, or one can leave out the
how, depending on what happens to be good. (*) Willing and doing can contain problematic metaphysical, ontological, or
mechanistic/causal errors, explicitly or implicitly, in presuppositions, premises, implications, or other ramifications.
Willing and doing can be part of strategic errors, of course—timing and ordering errors as well as other
suboptimalities. (*) An example P = [I will that] I am able to make sure that I’m safe for self and others in a way that
is costless and unreflective and becoming this way itself didn’t cause undue or irreparable harm to self and others… [do
your best to have a maximally wide conception of what a valid P could be, aspects both verbalizable and very difficult
or impossible to fully verbalize] (*) An example A = carefully make sure that I’m aware that I can be aware of the skin
over my bicep while attending to my posture as a whole while making sure that… [do your best to have a maximally wide
conception of what a valid A could be, aspects both verbalizable and very difficult or impossible to fully verbalize]
(*) “do so” can mean both start doing so and keep doing so (allow, participate, etc.); “don’t do so” can mean both stop
doing so and deliberately refrain from doing so (allow, participate, etc.) (*) “good/bad to (not) do/will X” can
possibly be read as “good/bad to (not) do/will X contextually for me in this case”; there are other readings. (*) One
might will a conditionally; e.g. I will that X (only) if Y; e.g. I will that (it the case that) X (only) if (it is the
case that) Y. [(*) …is/be/become/is-already/… the case that…] [(*) … I will that I
believe/expect/predict/anticipate/feel/stand/live/stance/hold-myself/etc./… in such or thus way/sense/manner that it is
the case that X if it is true that it is the the case that X in such or thus way/sense/manner; I will that I
appropriately either believe/expect/predict/anticipate/feel/stand/live/stance/hold-myself/etc./… in such or thus
way/sense/manner that it is not the case that X in such or thus way/sense/manner or that I have the absence of a
belief/expecting/expectation/prediction/anticipation/feeling/standing/living/stance/holding-myself/etc./… in such or
thus way/sense/manner that it is the case that X if it is false that it is the the case that X in such or thus
way/sense/manner; …] (*) Sometimes willing and doing will have good parts and bad parts. And if you decompose them you
can leave out the bad and do just the good. (*) If some willing or doing is or would be good to do except for some bad
thing about it, then, if you can, take apart the willing or doing so only the good part remains and do that. Or, find a
way to compensate for the bad thing, that you can do and is good to do, and also do that. (*) p2 ~= willing/absence,
surrender/absence, doing/absence, undoing/absence (*) ex: will that I know what’s good to will through a sequence of
self-states that are not too bad (*) ex: will that I know what’s good to do through a sequence of self-states that are
not too bad (*) (1) If good to will and can will (or keep willing) do so. If bad to will and can stop or prevent, do so.
If good to do one of those but can’t, then make sure you’ve stopped trying completely. (2) If good to surrender and can
surrender (or keep surrendering) do so. If bad to surrender and can stop or prevent, do so. If good to do one of those
but can’t, then make sure you’ve stopped trying completely. (3) If good to do and can do (or keep doing) do so. If bad
to do and can stop or prevent, do so. If good to do one of those but can’t, then make sure you’ve stopped trying
completely. (4) If good to undo and can undo, do so. If bad to undo and can stop or prevent, do so. If good to do one of
those but can’t, then make sure you’ve stopped trying completely. (*) Sometimes a doing or willing will be both good and
bad, that is one or more (sub-)parts of the willing will be good and one or more other (sub-)parts will be bad. This can
be fractal as (sub-)parts can have (sub-)parts that can be good and bad. One can use doing and willing (if good and
possible) to break apart willings and doings into (contextually) good and bad parts or “neutral” parts that can
potentially be done by themselves or recombined into larger units and done as a whole. [How to do the actual “breaking
apart” is hard to specify generally; it will be contextual, contingent, and idiosyncratic. See p8 for evocative
possibilities. Briefly, you might ask what’s good or bad in or about things. Again, please note that none of this is
intended to presuppose or make ontological (or even/including methodological) commitments about how to do this or the
nature or essence of such parts. Remember to not inappropriately reify anything, including notes like this.] (*) There
is a “special” class of doing, the doing that precedes/enables/causes/facilitates not doing or the absence of doing. X
might = suppress, dispel, dissolve, prevent, block, have the absence of, do-to-not-do, do-in-order-to-not-do, hold-back,
allow-something-else-to-happen, etc. [Remember to not inappropriately reify any of this.][cf. pleasant distraction or
pull-away is not always good to follow or surrender to. See distraction/diversion/displacement in p3.] (*) Don’t
improperly reify “proposition,” don’t take that too seriously. “Propositions” might have an “implicit component” not
fully accounted for by the words. (*) All the above applies to willing/doing you’re already willing/doing—if become
aware you’re willing/doing it, you can keep doing it or stop/have the absence of it, as per the rest of the
instructions. (*) good [to do] = contextually good [to do], now, at the very least (*) compare “good” with “good
(enough)”—when same; when different? (*) Example: ”have been good to do so" ~= Like, you try to (a) do/will X or (b)
have the absence of Q, because it seemed like that would have been good. But you find you can't. And then you explore
whether there's still a part of you, something, somewhere, that's still trying to have (a) or (b) happen. (*) Your
generally available set of actions/doing should expand over time, more fine-grain, more differentiated, lighter,
omni-directional, multifarious, start-on-dime, stop-on-dime, interleave rapidly. They should also ideally become
applicable in more and more contexts, more body locations, more phenomenologies, more senses/meanings/etc. Sometimes
your available actions will shrink to a point, and that’s ok. But generally you want more and more, and more and more
subtle, sometimes fast, barely nameable, barely effable, beyond language, and so forth. You might sometimes have mental
tags or phenomenological tags or verbal tags or “knowing contexts” for them, and that’s great. And, there will be times
when you’re taking relatively more new and/or unique/one-off/instance-of-themselves/unclassifiable actions/doings. (In
some sense they’re all unique by virtue of their preconceptual referent and context.) (*) There can be doing on the
border between surrender and doing or vice versa, where are you sort of doing but you also surrendered, or vice versa.
Liminal doing; liminal surrender.



p3: • For which it’s good to do so and you can do do, will that you become aware of willing, acting/doing, expecting,
seeming, appearing, convincing and denying that is or will be currently good to become aware of. And, simultaneously,
for which it’s good to do so and you can do so, will that you do not become aware of willing, expecting, seeming, and
appearing that is or will be currently bad to become aware of. • If you become aware of (presently and directly)
[experiencing] [in such or such and thus manner[/sense/ways in which there is (~for yourself~)]] [~~] willing W that or
(something) like or (something) in the neighborhood of [proposition] P then, if you can and it’s good to do so, will
that you have the absence of willing to change that willing W during this particular interval of awareness but possibly
willing to change it imminently or during other intervals. • If you become aware of (presently and directly)
[experiencing] [in such or such and thus manner[/sense/ways in which there is (~for yourself~)]] [~provisionally~]
expecting that or (something) like or (something) in the neighborhood of [proposition] P then, if you can and it’s good
to do so, will that you have the absence of willing to change that expecting during this particular interval of
awareness but possibly willing to change it imminently or during other intervals. • If you become aware of (presently
and directly) [experiencing] [in such or such and thus manner[/sense/ways in which there is (~for yourself~)]]
[~indirectly~] seeming that or (something) like or (something) in the neighborhood of [proposition] P then, if you can
and it’s good to do so, will that you have the absence of willing to change that seeming during this particular interval
of awareness but possibly willing to change it imminently or during other intervals. • If you become aware of (presently
and directly) [experiencing] [in such or such and thus manner[/sense/ways in which there is (~for yourself~)]]
[~directly~] appearing(/looking) (?/it is apparent, ?/apparently) that or (something) like or (something) in the
neighborhood of [proposition] P then, if you can and it’s good to do so, will that you have the absence of willing to
change that appearing during this particular interval of awareness but possibly willing to change it imminently or
during other intervals. • If you become aware of (presently and directly) [experiencing] [in such or such and thus
manner[/sense/ways in which there is (~for yourself~)]] [~directly and immediately~]
acting/doing[do/act/cause/maintain/enable/incept/start/prevent/block/stop/end/have part
in/querying/asking/wondering/imagining/storytelling/narrating/what-if-ing/solving/solutioning/questioning/partcipating/pushing/pulling/attending/image/envision/visualize/interrupt/preempt/interleave/substitute/switch/meaning-make/meaning-dissolve…]
that or (something) like or (something) in the neighborhood of [] X then, if you can and it’s good to do so, will that
you have the absence of willing to change that doing/happening/something during this particular interval of awareness
but possibly willing to change it imminently or during other intervals. • If you become aware of (presently and
directly) [experiencing] [in such or such and thus manner[/sense/ways in which there is (~for yourself~)]] [~~] denying
that or (something) like or (something) in the neighborhood of [proposition] P then, if you can and it’s good to do so,
will that you have the absence of willing to change that denying during this particular interval of awareness but
possibly willing to change it imminently or during other intervals. • If you become aware of (presently and directly)
[experiencing] [in such or such and thus manner[/sense/ways in which there is (~for yourself~)]] [~~] convincing that or
(something) like or (something) in the neighborhood of [proposition] P then, if you can and it’s good to do so, will
that you have the absence of willing to change that convincing during this particular interval of awareness but possibly
willing to change it imminently or during other intervals. This list is a work in progress: seeming (that [proposition]
P) expecting (that [proposition] P) willing (that [proposition] P) appearing (that [proposition] P)
explicating/articulating/enwordening/verbalizing (of [proposition] P) clarifying/separating/deconfusing (of
[proposition] P) assessing/judging/evaluating (whether X is good or bad…) awareness of knowledge of inability awareness
of knowledge of ignorance (of not knowing [something]) awareness of knowledge of insufficiency or inadequacy ?awareness
of knowledge of impossibility awareness of knowledge of possiblity/necessity/contingency/duty/obligation/responsibility…
being (identity) [I/me/self/]person/group/mixture] X [cf. Who (all) am I/is this being?] being (nature;
causal/historical/telic nature) [] X [cf. What am I being?] being history being current state being current dynamics
being causal laws being telos
doing/acting/behaving/[/thinking]causing/enabling/maintaining/starting/stopping/ending/preventing/blocking [] X
assessing/judging/evaluating X to be Y; assessing/judging/evaluating (whether X is good or bad…) immersive childhood or
any past feel awareness of knowledge of lack of safety for being aware of the knowledge of a particular thing (cf bad to
know) awareness of knowledge of part-of-whole-ness certainty knowledge of certain inevitable success [with respect to X]
knowledge of certain unimpeachable (veridical) goodness [of X] knowledge of (disendorsed) not knowing (something)
knowledge of (mediately endorsed) not knowing (something) knowledge of temporarily not knowing something previously
known knowledge of provisionally disendorsed, felt certain knowledge of reality or how things work [regarding some
experience or something in particular] [knowledge of believed irrational seeming safety] knowledge of need for safety
knowledge of need for certainty awareness of past, immersive world-feel knowledge of seeming unsafety expectation that
something will make sense in some particular way expectation that something will be explainable in some particular way
expectation that something will work out or succeed in some particular way knowledge of having (had?) no idea what’s/was
going on; knowing of having been confused in a particular (past or present/ongoing) situation or context knowing now
knowing from the past abeyance causing/maintaining endorsed abeyance urge/impulse/overcoming… to… desiring underlying
motivation… ground… basis… knowing (that [proposition] P) understanding (that [proposition] P) believing convincing
(that [proposition] P) denying (that [proposition] P) doubting (that [proposition] P) considering (that [proposition] P)
representing (that [proposition] P) ?asserting (that [proposition] P)
wanting/desiring/hoping/longing/needing/requiring/wishing/craving/thirsting/?grasping (that [proposition] P) planning
(that [proposition] P) demanding/extorting/??foreclosing/insisting (that [proposition] P) excusing (like making excuses,
rationalizing, self-justifying) (that [proposition] P) remembering blaming owing reifying enforcing/forcing; active
holding, keeping, blocking, propping things up avoiding asserting rehearsing exclaiming planning, intending,
anticipating… sensing that perceiving thinking urging listening to yourself from there or in such and thus a
manner/sense/way, maybe or not give up knowing or understanding temporarily for here, and maybe or not allow yourself to
be moved like so [reverie, trance, dream, reminiscence, immersion, flashback, not-now-ness, not-right-now-ness,
non-present-moment-ness] blocking, overriding knowledge of where a particular representation lives in relation to all
other representations knowledge of where something in particular lives in the mind and/or experience knowledge of other
human minds knowledge of other human bodies knowledge of the relationship between other human minds and other human
bodies knowledge of where the future lives knowledge of spatial location knowledge of spatial location in relation to
oneself knowledge of what things are “inside/internal” (if anything) knowledge of what things are “outside/external” (if
anything) awareness of something “inside/internal” awareness of something “outside/external” knowledge of
“insideness/internalness” (if any) knowledge of “outsideness/externalness” (if any) awareness of
“insideness/internalness” (if any) awareness of “outsideness/externalness” (if any) knowledge of borders or boundaries
or lack thereof awareness of borders or boundaries or lack thereof knowledge of distance between you and something else
or lack thereof awareness of distance between you and something else or lack thereof knowledge of counterfactuality
(other ways something could be, all else [being] equal/the same) knowledge of optionality knowledge of
could-be-otherwise-ness (cf counterfactuality, contingency, dimensions of variation) knowledge of
could-have-been-otherwise-ness (cf counterfactuality, contingency, dimensions of variation) knowledge of
(seeming-)couldn’t-be-other-wise-ness knowledge of where sense(meaning)-making lives; knowledge of coherent meaning;
knowledge of noncommital, neither endorsed-nor-disendorsed discoherence awareness of particular sense(meaning) or
representational content as such awareness of coherent meaning awareness of noncommital, neither
endorsed-nor-disendorsed discoherence (discoherent “meaning”) knowledge of
haste/rushing/bypass/corner-cutting/force/forcing/smashing/crushing/hammering awareness of force/forcing/haste knowledge
of seeming unsolvabliity knowledge of care knowledge of immaturity awareness of immature representational content
knowledge of responsibility knowledge of “thinking” [about X] [taking place] awareness of “thinking” [about X] [taking
place] knowledge of “model building” [about X for (the purpose/intent of) Y] [taking place] awareness of “model
building” [about X for (the purpose/intent of) Y] [taking place] awareness of “the sensations of thinking” knowledge of
attending awareness of “attending” awareness of “the sensations of attending” knowledge/awareness/experience of
belief/believing/“belief”/“believing”/etc.… [sic] knowledge of sensations of believing awareness of sensations of
believing knowledge of sensations of expecting awareness of sensations of expecting knowledge of imagining awareness of
imagining knowledge of sensations of imagining awareness of sensations of imagining knowledge/awareness of “towards”
knowledge/awareness of “away” knowledge/awareness of “forwards” knowledge/awareness of “backwards” knowledge/awareness
of “good” knowledge/awareness of “bad” knowledge/awareness of “updating” knowledge/awareness of disbelief
knowledge/awareness of pain/suffering knowledge/awareness of goodness of X knowledge/awareness of intolerability
knowledge/awareness urgency/haste/rushing/hurry knowledge/awareness of “X feels so good” awareness of the current felt
goodness of something endorsed (or not) as being bad knowledge/awareness of “road to nowhere-ness” [knowledge/awareness
of “energy drain”/“motivation drain-out”/“strength drain-out”] knowledge/awareness of “counterintuitiveness to ‘go
there’/‘do that’” knowledge/awareness of “extreme badness” knowledge/awareness of “critical badness” knowledge/awareness
of “too good-ness” knowledge/awareness of seeming “[I have] no ability/know-how/models/knowledge of how to handle that
and [I] never will knowledge/awareness of possibility/potentiality knowledge of coalescing/gathering knowledge of
dispersing/spreading knowledge/awareness of credulity/credulousness knowledge/awareness of seeming local fallibility
knowledge/awareness of immersive childhood feel/immersive prenatal feel/immersive otherworldly feel/ another time
feel/foreign iintention/alien intention knowledge/awareness of observer plus dynamics as such knowledge/awareness of
sensory memory knowledge of counterintuitiveness knowledge/awareness of “dark”/nonsalient sensations knowledge/awareness
of seeming “nothing” that is actually the presence of “dark”/“black”/nonsalient sensations awareness of
subtle/quiet/low-intensity/low-magnitude/barely-there sensations knowledge of awareness of the currently felt goodness
of something knowledge/awareness of “nowhere to go nonexistence dysregulation Intolerability uhandleability knowledge of
not having any idea what’s going on knowledge of having no idea whats going on knowledge/awareness of “actually think
going to die or go insane or etc if look” knowledge/awareness of “no choice but to just look” knowledge/awareness of
[(countering) good thing X] even if [(corresponding) bad thing Y] knowledge/awareness of [(countering) good thing X]
even though [(corresponding) bad thing Y] knowledge/awareness of [(countering) good thing X] even while [(corresponding)
bad thing Y] knowledge/awareness of X would be bad if true/false even for a second/instant knowledge/awareness of don’t
know [if X is existing/obtaining/actual/nonactual/true/false/good/bad] for sure/in certainty knowledge/awareness of
acceptance [of current belief or actuality [that] X [is/isn’t/might/may be
existing/obtaining/true/false/unknown/unknowable/good/bad]] (or ok to look) even if don’t know [how (to
do/get/have/be/achieve/solve/start/stop/fix/do/undo (X)] now, might know in future knowledge/awareness of “no big
deal”/“that’s not a big deal”/“that’s not important”/“that doesn’t mean anything”/“that’s
meaningless”/push-away/minimization knowledge/awareness of “feels like
dying/dissolution/loss-of-will/loss-of-self/soul-damage/soul-corruption/insanity” knowledge/awareness of “[effortless]
[almost-already-there] stability in/as all of that” knowledge/awareness of seeming
“it-was-over-before-it-even-began-and/but-I-just-didn’t-even-know-it-yet-until-just-right-now” trauma
knowledge/awareness of immersive dream knowledge/awareness of immersive “delusion” *knowledge/awareness of seeming “it’s
not working” *knowledge/awareness of “oh, that *is* the thing” knowledge/awareness of optionality knowledge/awareness of
lack of optionality, choicelessness knowledge/awareness of “something I could do right now or not” knowledge/awareness
of “local choices I could choose amongst/from among” knowledge/awareness of “something that doesn’t have to be taken at
face value” knowledge/awareness of a “seeming self-made assertion that can be provisionalized” knowledge of
misattribution; awareness of that which has been misattributed knowledge/awareness of “what needs to be real or not-real
in order to meditate” knowledge/awareness of “don’t want that” [but you actually might] knowledge/awareness of “that
would have been so good or that at least would have (temporarily) felt so good, had it happened [given
that/time/place/age/degree-of-experience-and-knowledge] knowledge/awareness of (seeming/chosen) “[that’s] not for
me”/“not going to have that, choose that, go after that; will give away, relinquish, refuse, dismiss that”
knowledge/awareness of too good/bad to be true/false/real/existing/obtaining/factual/counterfactual/present/absent
knowledge/awareness of how I would have solved X in a vacuum, with no cultural input knowledge/awareness of an inability
to think, plan, or do anything as such knowledge/awareness of continuous [(subtle)] prevention knowledge/awareness of
“didn’t think I had to look at this”; “didn’t think I had time to look at this” knowledge/awareness of “if I take the
time to look at that then something bad will happen” knowledge/awareness of reliance on sensations representing
not-here-and-now-ness knowledge/awareness of turning towards inside instead of outside for stabilization
knowledge/awareness of inclination towards indirect/mediated/symbolic control knowledge/awareness of “had I only known
X” knowledge/awareness/experience of “is-ness” [knowledge/awareness/experience of thinking, believing, etc.]
knowledge/awareness/experience of “mode of being as such” knowledge/awareness/experience of being “mode of being as
such” [sic] knowledge/awareness of inner conflict knowledge/awareness of “not me” awareness of
gappiness/gappyness/distraction/experiential-temporal-discontinuity/jump/jog/gap/discontinuity/reconfiguration/distraction/diversion/displacement
[might feel good or bad and could be either good or bad] awareness of doubling knowledge/awareness of a
lack/deficit/sparsity of understanding knowledge/awareness of an absence of understanding knowledge/awareness of
confusion awareness of “getting”/“getting mind to do X” [cf forcing] knowledge of seeming occluded resolve knowledge of
insecurity knowledge of “temptation”, insecurity, credulity/credulousness knowledge/awareness of “moral reality”;
causal/moral/reality knowledge/awareness of desire or intention to make [X] actual knowledge/awareness of juxtaposition
knowledge/awareness of [directly] “having no idea how to do that/X” knowledge/awareness of “don’t know how to do that/X”
awareness of [a] “bounded nothing/absence pocket/bubble” awareness of “that which would consume all [resources] [because
of intrinsic interestingness/pleasure/goodness; would want to do it all the time to exclusion of []] awareness of “that
which would consume all [resources] [because of impossible/infinite ‘problematicness’] awareness of [a] “knowing/[being
able to ]tell[ing] thread/bridge” knowledge/awareness darkness vs true absence; true absence vs darkness
knowledge/awareness gap discontinuity, blue, partial blink out, partial absence, jog knowledge of unfixability;
knowledge of unsolvability knowledge/awareness of “as real as it gets” [with respect to X] knowledge/awareness of
“serious as a heart attack” [with respect to X] knowledge/awareness of revision knowledge/awareness of error correction
knowledge/awareness of counterfactuality knowledge/awareness of permanence [knowledge/awareness of “It’s just what
happened”] knowledge/awareness of “unrecoverabiity/“unrecoverable; can’t recover from that” knowledge/awareness of “not
in a million/billion years”/never knowledge/awareness of “right in reality” knowledge/awareness of “weaves reality
together” knowledge/awareness of “how the world/everything/reality works” knowledge/awareness of “how the
world/everything/reality must work” knowledge/awareness of “it would be critical bad if X” knowledge/awareness of “new
or renewed optionality [to stop/start X]” knowledge/awareness of “bypass” or “pre-bypass”/“should just be able to[ X[,
full stop]]” knowledge/awareness of [“attempted”/“attempting”]“lock-in”/“stability” knowledge/awareness of “agency,
errors in” [sic] knowledge/awareness of “doing, errors in” [sic] knowledge/awareness of self-conceptualization
knowledge/awareness of self-conceptualization, errors in [sic] knowledge/awareness of “seamlessly decide to do and then
do something” vs “just do” knowledge/awareness of “belief [phenomenology]” (*) knowledge/awareness of “plan
[phenomenology]” (*) knowledge/awareness of “error” knowledge/awareness of “two things that are combined that shouldn’t
be” knowledge/awareness of wrongness/incorrectness knowledge/awareness of “this is my life, now” [~transient]
knowledge/awareness of an ‘instance of itself” (after Eugene Gendlin) knowledge/awareness of “belief in punctate
updates” [though not necessarily conceptualized or named exactly as such] knowledge/awareness of [an instance of] [a/an]
intellectual-grasping/update/thought knowledge/awareness of limit(s)/edge(s) of its world knowledge/awareness of
instance-exemplification [sic] of the attention paradigm as such knowledge/awareness of “I am *that* which attends
[pays/places attention]” knowledge/awareness [identity-feel](s); being someone ??”I” without identity ?or
trajectory/future knowledge/awareness of relief awareness of “non-Euclidean openings” awareness of “other
realities”/“another reality” awareness of “openings to other realities” [“zones”] awareness of “skhandas”(sp?)
knowledge/awareness of “the whole damn thing and it’s relationship to me” knowledge/awareness of “waiting/trusting for
‘fill-in’/‘building’” knowledge/awareness of “fakeness” or “more fake” knowledge/awareness of “more real”
knowledge/awareness of going-with-it-/running-with-it-ness (unassuming-self-assuming [sic]) knowledge/awareness of “this
is the case-ness” knowledge of unhandledness, seeming-liability-ness knowledge/awareness of “real-feeling-ness” (cf.
immersiveness, consequences, stakes) knowledge/awareness of bypass knowledge/awareness of pushing knowledge/awareness of
forcing knowledge/awareness of structuring knowledge/awareness of choicepoint knowledge/awareness of
what-got-you-here-won’t-get-you-there-ness knowledge/awareness of againstness; direct opposition knowledge/awareness of
“knowledge of layering” knowledge/awareness of subverbal/paraverbal intention knowledge/awareness of
subverbal/paraverbal structure/commitment knowledge/awareness of overloaded substrate knowledge/awareness of substrate
contention knowledge/awareness of substrate usage detachment/refactoring knowledge/awareness of “somatic refactoring”
knowledge/awareness of desert, deservingness (positive/negative) knowledge/awareness of
“making-thing-exist”/“making-things-exist” knowledge/awareness of “selfing”/“self-ing” knowledge/awareness of
“permanence-ing” knowledge/awareness of “independent existence-ing” knowledge/awareness of “[attempted] ’solution-ing’
for a particular thing that affirms/enhances/strengthens/facilitates the very thing that is the problem”
knowledge/awareness of transparently-take-for-granted knowledge/awareness of opposite-masquerading-as-forward
knowledge/awareness of liminally blocked/surfacing urge and/or impulse and/or “dysregulation” knowledge/awareness of
near-or-full-overwhelming-ness-to-act-rather-than-not-act knowledge/awareness of only-ness knowledge/awareness of
the-very-thing-that-ness knowledge/awareness of anything-but-the-mainline(-but-still-forward)-ness knowledge/awareness
of artificiality awareness of suffering awareness of grasping/accumulating awareness of anxiety knowledge/awareness of
has-to-work-ness/must-work-ness/has-to-succeed-ness/must-succeed-ness knowledge/awareness of [body] [felt]
anticipations/ing knowledge/awareness of [bodymind] commitments knowledge/awareness of disbelief/“disbelief”
knowledge/awareness of disbelief-as-such/“disbelief as such” knowledge/awareness of [“particularly active”]
disbelief-as-such/“disbelief as such” knowledge/awareness of disbelief that X knowledge/awareness of disbelief that X is
real/true/obtaining knowledge/awareness of seeming-darkness knowledge/awareness of almost-darkness knowledge/awareness
of “blackness” knowledge/awareness of low-magnitude-ness (sensation) knowledge/awareness of low-intensity-ness
(sensation) knowledge/awareness of truth/“truth” knowledge/awareness of existence/“existence” knowledge/awareness of
reason/reasoning/“reason”/“reasoning”/“Reason” knowledge/awareness of latent, above-threshold-if-triggered,
self-/other-dangerous behavioral impulses knowledge/awareness of credulity+naivete+{having no idea what's going on}
knowledge/awareness of "reality pocket" knowledge/awareness of heaviness (h) knowledge/awareness of lightness (h)
knowledge/awareness of world pockets knowledge/awareness of latent, above-threshold-if-triggered, self-/other-dangerous
behavioral impulses knowledge/awareness of indeterminacy knowledge/awareness of
rushing/haste/hurry/bypass/override/force/pressure/pushing knowledge/awareness of nebulosity and constraint
knowledge/awareness of anxiety knowledge/awareness of the (felt) goodness/gift of anxiety knowledge/awareness of
reaching knowledge/awareness of clawing knowledge/awareness of [active] directionality knowledge of fragility knowledge
of safety knowledge/awareness of error knowledge/awareness of suffering as such knowledge/awareness of reification as
such knowledge/awareness of impermanence as such top-down person-ing [sic]



p4: • In the ways in which it’s good to do so, and you can (are able to) do so, and not in the ways in which it’s bad to
do so, temporarily will that you’re temporarily globally/totally/wholly/unifiedly aware of nothing, or the
complete/total absence or anything, or the absence of any something-ness or appearance, expecting, seeming, willing,
etc. • When you are finished with the above, in the ways in which it’s good to do so, and you can (are able to) do so,
and not in the ways in which it’s bad to do so, make sure you completely stop willing that you’re aware of nothing.


p5: • In the ways in which it’s good to do so, and you can (are able to) do so, and not in the ways in which it’s bad to
do so, temporarily will that everything you’re experiencing in awareness/aware of, globally/totally/wholly/unifiedly
remains stable/stably just as it is without changing in any particular moment, and don’t stabilize what would be bad to
stabilize or that you can’t stabilize. (So of course, it’s likely that things will be changing. So, for any change, in
that moment, in any particular moment, [for what’s good to and can and not bad to] you want that state to stably
persist. So, whatever is, you’re willing that that stably persists [for what’s good to and can and not bad to]. The
effect will be to have some things slow down or become more salient/apparent. Also on assumption that everything you are
is cycling through consciousness/awareness, so that this will ultimately be exhaustive…) [“In the exact way you’re
having exactly these
sensations(??+knowing/understanding/meaning/thinking/believing/feeling/imagining/expecting/sensing/perceiving…??)/total
experiential state, total/everything in awareness/aware of, totally/globally/unifiedly in this exact instant/moment,
exactly as they currently are in this exact instant/moment [no brighter, no dimmer, no more vivid, no less vivid, no
changes in foreground/background/salience/focus/surround/ground, no following/seeking/avoiding/preference/agenda,
commentary, meta-commentary unless it’s already exactly happening/expectation/inclination/presupposition], in the ways
in which you can and it’s good to do so, be willing to have exactly these sensations exactly forever.”][“be willing to
work/operate from inside of this [as it is]] forever”][capture your exact global
awareness/being/experiencing/imagining/expecting/feeling/knowing/understanding/believing state in any particular moment
and perpetuate as long as you can without adding anything, adding nothing to that state itself][cf. the “soaking”
instruction from standard noting practice, though that’s a local operation, as it were][perfectly willing to stably have
this while simultaneously perfectly letting go][cf the facilitation of vividness and clarity][cf mindfulness; “but”][any
particular moment, exactly as it is, last forever][“perfectly holding on to everything without adding anything
[“further”] to that”] • When you are finished with the above, in the ways in which it’s good to do so, and you can (are
able to) do so, and not in the ways in which it’s bad to do so, make sure you completely stop willing that everything
you’re experiencing in awareness/aware of remains stably just as it is.


p6: • In the ways in which it’s good to do so, and you can (are able to) do so, and not in the ways in which it’s bad to
do so, temporarily (be) will(ing) that (a) everything you’re experiencing in awareness/aware of,
globally/totally/wholly/unifiedly and (b) your relationship to everything (not just your experience in awareness; but
also plans, goals, intentions, ontology, everything, everything, everything), improves, becomes better, becomes more
good. This is possibly or likely with global nonmonotonicity, local nonmonotonicity and local tradeoffs. • When you’re
finished with the above as such, in the ways in which it’s good to do so and you can (are able to) do so, and not in the
ways in which it’s bad to do so, make sure you stop willing the above as such in the ways that make sense.


p7: • In the ways in which it’s good to do so, and you can (are able to) do so, and not in the ways in which it’s bad to
do so, temporarily surrender, allow to be any which way, release, let go of (a) everything you’re experiencing in
awareness/aware of, globally/totally/wholly/unifiedly and (b) your relationship to absolutely everything (not just your
experience in awareness; but also plans, goals, intentions, ontology, everything, everything, everything) to be any
which way, no particular way or another, allow everything to change freely as it wants or does. Not needing anything at
all to be any particular way, not expecting anything at all to be any particular way, and allowing anything and
everything (at all) to be any particular way. Release from preconception, presupposition… unnecessary contingent
particularity… Release from partiality or locality… • When you’re finished with the above as such, in the ways in which
it’s good to do so and you can (are able to) do so, and not in the ways in which it’s bad to do so, make sure you stop
willing the above as such in the ways that make sense.


p8: (There will be a right way and a wrong way and a right time and a wrong time to incline towards answering any of
these questions.) If can ask in a way/manner/sense that’s good, and it is good to ask at/during the time of asking
through the interval of (possibly) answering or partially or fully answering: *1) Who am I being (right now)? *2)
What/which is me and/or mine? What/which is you and/or yours? What/which is his/her/it and/or theirs? *3) What is
this/that/my [(necessary) essence/]nature here/there? What is this that I am being right now, here/there and how does
it/that [(necessary) essence/](nature) work? *4) What is this/that that I’m or this part of me is currently
knowing/believing/understanding/representing/thinking/expecting, there/here? What do things feel/seem to be from its
perspective, as it, from it? How does the world seem to be to/from it? *5) What is/are this/these practice(s) for? Why,
for what (purpose/goal/good...), am I doing (any of) this/these at all? *6) Why, for what (purpose/goal/good...), am I
doing anything at all rather than doing nothing? *7) What question of these or any would be good to ask next? *8) How is
one to understand/know themselves? *9) Why is there something, anything rather than nothing? *x) what is the basis or
ground of everything? What does everything depend on but this? [*10) cf What would be good to do?] [*11) What minimally
and correctly/truthfully explains everything?] (*12) What is the deepest or most fundamental or most unconditional
determining or causal factor or truth of what you experience or are aware of or attend to next? (*13) How does will
and/or volitional doing work? How does nonvolitional or currently uninfluenceable enacting of self-change or self-telos
work? What is the relationship between efficient(?) cause and telic or final cause? (*14) How do you come to know what
is good and bad? (*15) Recall, feel back, to the immersive childhood (or prenatal or any age, as far back as you can go
or wherever you’re drawn to or what makes sense or is good) feel, that sensory experience, that sensory feel, from the
inside, from that perspective. (*16) Is this [current (self and) world] the best of all possible worlds? How do you
know? (*17) What terrible tradeoffs am I making? For what am I holding out on, keeping what door open, for good or bad,
for the slightest chance of X? How does that work and is that good to do? How do I know? (*18) What seems both terrible
and (critically) necessary/needed? (*19) What will you never ever share with anyone no matter what about yourself, or
your past, or who you were, or who you are, or what you want/desire? (*20) Where do you need to maximize something?
Where will you never have enough? Where will nothing ever be enough? Where is infinitly needed or where is even infinity
not enough? Why not determinate satisficing? (*21) For what must you risk the destruction of everything? What is worth
risking everything for? What are you already risking everything for? For what must you risk destroying what you already
have? What is worth that much that it is (seemingly) worth more than everything (or almost everything) else? What is so
good about having a shot at X? Is (risking everything for) having a shot at X for some further good? (*22) Where must
you be (self-)consistent and for what purpose? (*23) What would you do differently if you were truly alone or never
accountable, in a good way? (*24) What do you have no choice about? (*25) What must you do no matter what? (*26) What
outcome(s) must you avoid no matter what? (*27) What goal(s) must you achieve no matter what? (*28) In what ways can you
not give up, in a bad way? (*29) In what ways can you not commit, in a bad way? (*30) What is taking (up) or consuming
everything? (*31) How do things absolutely have to be? What absolutely has to be true? What absolutely has to be true in
absolutely a particular way? (*32) What are all the things you’re doing or solving just so you can get back to X? (*33)
What does or does not dictate global stringency or vigilance or room for error? How careful do you have to be in your
life and why? (*34) Is the world (reality, the planet, the cosmos, life, being alive) good or bad? (*35) What would you
tell someone if you could trust them completely? (*36) What would you tell someone if you knew the could and would
safely and competently help you in a way that was ok or good for you? (*37) If I can do X then I can do Y; If I can do Y
then I can do Z. So I should just do Z. But, then, what good things about X and Y might never happen? (*38) For what do
you believe if you don’t do X then Y will never happen? (*39) What would be intolerable if it unexpectedly happened?
(*40) What options or option types are you automatically/unreflectively discarding? (*41) cf the perfect is the enemy of
the good; is the “perfect” the enemy of the perfect? (*42) Where are you getting the order wrong? Doing (or trying to
do) A before B instead of B before A? (*43) What isn’t getting a chance to breath? What doesn’t have a chance to breath?
(*44) What do you still feel (e.g. fear) from your childhood? (*45) In what ways do you still feel the “real immersive
feel” of being a child? In what ways do you really feel like you haven’t aged? (*46) What was the first thing that
happened to you or that you experienced that contributed to you becoming like this instead of like that? (*47) What are
the real rules for how things work? (*48) Do you feel like you are the whole of your past? (*59) What did you leave
behind? What were the clean breaks? What of your past must you confront or become or embrace? (*) What would you do if
you had unlimited resources? What would you do if you could snap your fingers and magically make anything happen? For
what would you push a button to instantly make it happen? For what would you think you would push the button, but, if it
were actually in front of you you wouldn’t or couldn’t? Why? Everything were to suddenly become OK, what would’ve
changed? (*) Where do other people’s “insides” or “insideness” live? (*) What is the relationship between other people’s
“insideness” and “outsideness”? (*) Where is other people’s “insideness” and “outsidness” in relation to your
“insideness” and “outsideness”? (*)What is the relationship between your “insideness” and your “outsideness” and
environmental sensation and your experience of environmental location? (*) How do you know where things are in
relationship to yourself? (*) Is the knowing of spatial location (of, say, sounds) “inside” you or “outside” you? (*)
Where is knowledge of spatial location? Where is awareness of spatial location? What is the experience of spatial
location? (*) Where is knowledge of spatial relationships? Where is awareness of spatial relation? What is the
experience of spatial relation? (*) What is living a life like? What is being alive? What is it like to live a life?
What is it like to go through life? How do you describe “what a life is”? (*) Where does the past live? Where does
history live? Do history or the past exist outside of interpersonal interaction/“social reality”? (*) “Where”/“how” does
death live? Can that “location” be otherwise? (*) “Where”/“how” does the future live? Can that “location” be otherwise?
(*) “Where”/“how” does forever/immortality/deathlessness[ or not]/sempiternity/eternity/timelessness/“end-of-time-ness”
live? Can that/those “location”(s) be otherwise? (*) Where/how does pain and/or suffering live? (*) What is the only
thing that’s real? (*) Where does truth and the transitivity of truth preservation live? (*) Where and how does truth
live in mind, experience, and behavior? (*) What is the relationship between truth and freedom? (*) What is the
relationship between truth, freedom, and intolerably critical badness? (*) What are you expecting? What would be better?
What would be better than that, better still? (*) What’s being left out? What is a frame that can hold everything
(relevant)? (*) What do you feel like doing? What do you feel like doing right now? (*) Where is “infinity” and how is
it represented? (*) What is your basis for action? What are you acting from? What beliefs or world-seeming are you
acting from? (*) What is a basis for unconditional action? What is a basis for unconditional, a whole hearted action?
(*) What do you take responsibility for? (cf duty obligation) (*) What is your basis for belief? (*) What is an
unconditional basis for believe? (*) What is the difference between good and better? (*) What is the difference between
contextually good and ultimately good; contextually bad and ultimately bad? (*) What is the difference between
personally good and universally good? (*) What is the difference between good and necessary? (goodness and necessity)
(*) What is the difference between good and right? (cf right=duty/obligation/responsibility) (*) Is there any greater
whole worth dying for (the good of)? (*) What is the difference between this protocol and becoming a student of posture
and movement? (*) What is the difference between unconditional goodness and ultimate goodness? (cf imminence,
temporality, sempiternity, eternity, timelessness…) (*) Are causes singular, plural, or total/everything? (*) What is
true/existing/obtaining in all places, times, (worlds,) universes, contexts, conditions, timelessly, eternally,
sempiternally, unconditionally? (*) What are the limits on what is conceivable? What is the space of all conceivability?
What are the limits on what is conceivable separately from other somethings? (*) What is good to unifiedly [sic]
experience? (*) What do you want your life to concretely look, sound, and feel like? (etc.) How do you want your days to
be filled? (*) If there is or were one “intrinsic motivation” in all times, all places, all situations, all contexts,
what is or would it be? (*) What is the difference between one’s self-boundary and one’s sphere of influence? (*) When
something is bad, when should you change yourself and not the world, your intentions, plans, goals, etc.? When should
you change the world? (*) What’s real? What’s actual? (What things are real? What things are actual?) (*) What are
bodies? What is your body? Are bodies real? (*) What is and isn’t reality? (*) What desire or problem are you avoiding
at all costs? (*) What are minds? How do they work? What purpose do they serve? How does that feel from the inside? How
should it be used? (*) What is a (human) mind? (*) Is everything perfect; are things perfect? If not, where/why not?
(What’s bad? What (of everything) is bad? What’s bad here/everywhere? Where/what is concretely (or abstractly?) bad?
What’s wrong? What’s not right?) (*) How do you account for (the contents/value/means/ends of) “having believed” (X)
without needing to still believe (X)? [small-/medium-/large-scale reformatting] (*) What is everything that I rely on to
know what I “should”/should be doing? [cf should, duty, obligation, responsibility, rightness, correctness, necessity,
goodness, liking, loving, enjoying, wanting, desiring, hoping, longing, wishing, needing, preferring, nice-to-have,
need-to-have, X-to-have][identity, self, other/not-me-but-another-self, me/I/myself, selfhood, personhood, grouphood]
(*) What is should-ness? What is allowed-ness/permission? What is beyond either? [cf obliged, permitted, forbidden,
other/by-whom-ness, authority, for-what-purpose/goodness-ness] (*) How do I know/tell when something (sensations,
anything) is me? How do you know/tell when something (sensations, anything) is you? (How is that like something I do?
How is it different?) [identity, self, other/not-me-but-another-self, me/I/myself, selfhood, personhood, grouphood] (*)
What is authority? What is the basis of authority? What or who makes authority authoritative, and how? Who grants
authority? Who enforces authority? What are the benefits of obedience? (*) Who will and won’t take care of you? Along
what dimensions and what not? Who is and isn’t coming for you? Along what dimensions and what not? Who is coming/going
to save you, and how or how not? Who won’t save you, and how or how not? Who do and will you love? Who does and will
love you? (*) When are self-trust and self-reliance safe? When, if ever, is a lack of self-trust good? When self-trust
is lacking, in what ways is self-trust actually (still) present? (*) How can self and other be confused? (*) Who
determines what goodness is? Who determines what things are good? What determines what things are good? What makes
something good, likeable, desirable, enjoyable, ethical, moral, safe, correct, constructive, useful, valuable... ? (*)
If you’re experiencing pressure from someone, where is it actually coming from? [Is it coming from you? From them? Both?
Other? etc.] (*) What If X weren’t just so? What If X weren’t exactly just so? What If X weren’t exactly a particular
way? What would be bad about that? What would happen? What would happen instead? What would that mean? What would be the
improbable, fantastical ideal? What’s good about that? How would that feel? (*) [x] What are all the good things about
all the bad things? What are all the good things in all the bad things? What are all the mixed things in the good
things? What are all the mixed things and the bad things? What are all the good things in the mix things? What are all
the bad things in all the mixed things? All the good things about all the mixed things? What are all the bad things
about other mixed things? [What are all the good/bad/mixed things in/about all the good/bad/mixed things?] [cf.
comprehensiveness; exhaustivity] (*) What does it all mean? What does it all signify? Where is all the lack/absence of
meaning? Where is all the lack/absence of significance? Where is the meaning? Where is the significance? What is
meaningful? What is significant? What is not meaningful? What is not significant? What is basis of significance? What is
the basis of meaning? [cf. comprehensiveness; exhaustivity] [cf [x]] (*) What are all the true things about all the
false things? etc. [What are all the true/correct/false/wrong/incorrect/mixed things in/about all the
true/correct/false/wrong/incorrect/mixed things?] [cf. comprehensiveness; exhaustivity] [cf [x]] (*) What are all the
real things in all the fake things? etc. [What are all the
real/actual/obtaining/existing/veridical/fake/illusory/imaginary/mixed things in/about all the
real/actual/obtaining/existing/veridical/fake/illusory/imaginary/mixed things?] [cf. comprehensiveness; exhaustivity]
[cf [x]] (*) How are you being tripped up or slowed down by belief in belief? (*) “Why is the badness objectively real,
something ‘out there?’” (*) “Why are you a bad person?” (*) “Why is anything objectively real, something ‘out there?’”
(*) Are you allowed to come up with/find your own solutions? (*) What of your problems have you not yet solved? What of
your problems do you assume you can’t solve? (*) How does a mind decide anything? How does a mind decide? How does mind
choose anything? How doesn’t mind choose? (*) What if fear was unnecessary and you had none? (*) What could you have
done differently? What could anyone have done differently? [question is unrelated to the questions above and below] (*)
What concepts become unnecessary or ultimately meaningless? (*) Why are you doubting this right now instead of something
else right now? (*) Is that necessary? What can happen anytime or next time? (*) If you provisionally assume it will be
like this forever, how would you move forward (with all of that exactly like it is, now)? (*) What makes X bad? (*) How
would you move forward if you never meditated or used this protocol or did anything “inward focused” ever again? (*)
What if you completely stopped meditating or doing this protocol, temporarily? What then? (*) What if you gave up the
idea of meditating? What if you tabooed “meditation”? How would you move forward? (*) What if you were “like this” for
the rest of you life? How would you move forward? (*) What if meditation/protocoling wasn’t the only way out? What if
there was no out but also no need to get out? (*) What do you do as you’re sitting down to “do the meditation activity”?
What happens in the first milliseconds. And before that? What has already happened in the doing of that? What makes
“doing meditation” separate from everything else? What if you dropped all that? What would meditation be then? (*) What
if there was no meditation or pre-meditation or post-meditation but just mind? (*) What is meaningful for you? (*) What
is your meaninglessness? (e.g. personal death, e.g. heat death of the universe) (*) What is the relationship between
desire and intent? (*) What is the relationship between desire and intent and behavior and outcome? (*) What is the
relationship between meaning-laden phenomenology and body? (*) Where does agency originate from? (*) What are the errors
in your doing? (*) What are the errors in your willing? (*) What are the errors in your surrendering? (*) What are the
errors in your undoing? (*) What is the relationship between self-conceptualization and doing? (*) What is the
relationship between self-conceptualization and agency? (*) What is the relationship between self-conceptualization and
planning/intending/intent/will…? (*) Is it ok to look at the way “you’ve just been happening”? (*) What would anyone do
in this situation? (*) What is the relationship between phenomenology or “internal” experience and plan/“plan”? [sic]
(*) What is the relationship between phenomenology or “internal” experience and expectation? (*) How is your “plan” the
same or different from simply everything you currently are? (*) What are the relationships between natural planning and
artificial planning? (*) For what open questions do you already have the data [“within you”]? (*) Does the world need to
make sense in a very particular way? How/what is that way? (*) How is your mind working right now? In what manner? (*)
What language or meta-language is your mind using? What is the lingua franca of your mind? (*) What is the world? (*)
What is the relationship between meaning, completion, imminence, now, and stability, in no particular order? (*) Say
there’s something X that nothing “external” to you can give you, or that you can’t get doing “external” things. What is
X? (*) Say there’s something X that can only be gotten through “internal rearrangement.” What is X? (*) Has anything
ever-always-as-yet-still been completely untouched by all goal-seeking in your life? If so, what/where is that? (*) Do
you want to fuck and/or be accepted by your mom? Do you want to fuck and/or be accepted by your dad? Do you want to kill
either or both of your parents or any or all your siblings? (*) What as an AMAB or AFAB (a male assigned at birth, a
female assigned at birth) or intersex or contingent anything, can you definitely or merely apparently never receive,
have, get, do, etc.? (*) Who’s trying to get things for whom? (*) Where are you? (*) When are you? (*) What are you
doing (to undo) that’s an instance of a(/the very) thing you’re trying/intending to undo? (*) What happens in the
seconds and milliseconds before you start “officially” meditating, and what does that mean? (*) What is always already
now complete and unified and pure and...? (*) What is (your) fundamental insecurity? (*) Would you harm, rape, kill,
one-up, take advantage of, and/or gain advantage over another person if you were absolutely certain you’d never, ever
get caught or face any (external, gross) consequences, on your terms? (*) What are you doing to yourself X to prevent
yourself from doing bad/shameful/evil/destructive/etc thing Y? (And/or to keep yourself doing either good or believed
necessary thing Z?) (*) The whole point of meditating was to never have to face what/X? What is X? (*) How is [the very
fabric of] reality broken? (*) Does every towards have an away from? (*) What is the unity of opposites? (*) What is the
unification of concepts? (*) How does X contain Y? (“containment relations “) (*) What’s the one thing you’d never allow
yourself to be cornered into having to talk about? What are the things you’d never allow yourself to be cornered into
having to talk about? (*) What conversations can’t you (yet) have? (*) What can’t you extemporaneously talk about (a
lot), pretty quickly, maybe with a bit of a delay before you get going? (*) What is the relationship between “cognition
“and “embodiment “? (*) What things in your mind that cannot express themselves are the same time? (*) Is it safe to be
radically vulnerable to yourself? If not, how might that come to be? (*) What would still be the problem even if you
were certain you were perfectly healthy and you had one hundred million dollars in a trusted bank? (*) What would still
be a problem if you were rich, stably physically healthy, and immortal? (*) What are the relationships between inside,
now, future, outside? (*) How would you choose differently if no one you ever knew would ever know? Put a different way,
if you could live perfect double or triple lives, where no one in each life would ever, ever find out about the other
lives, what would you do in each life? Put another way, if everyone you ever knew or know gave you perfect permission to
do as you wanted and also would never or know or be able to cast judgment on you or whatever you did, what would you do
or do differently? (*) In what ways are you not taking unified and total responsibility for your life? And what are the
ways in which you are? (*) What is/was your entire life going to be, including in light of possible sudden and/or
unexpected death? (*) What problems would yet persist even after “all your problems were solved”? (*) Could you just
exist like this, if you had to? (How could that be ok?) (*) What’s your meta goal? (*) What are you actually doing? (*)
Is here and now bad? (*) Do you hate reality? (*) What are the places from which you’ve never left? (*) What are the
ultraprecise, hyperprecise (interpersonal or otherwise) experience you want to have, need to have (to unlock, to uncoil,
to move forward, to love, to anything, etc.)? (*) How is your current trying/doing/solution-ing getting in the way of
actual no-brainer, will-be-fully-endorsed/wanted, solutions, positive changes? (*) What is terrifying for it to not
already be true? (*) What is the difference between any and every “two” “sensations”? (*) What are you trying to
maximize? Why not sufficiency? What will never be enough? Why or how do you know? (*) Do you want it all to just
stop/end/finish/cease? (*) Are you trying to directly/immediate/instantly/something control (change, precent, block,
cause) sensations? (*) How are you beyond beyond [sic] fucked? (*) What can you not accept? (*) What present limitations
of yours can you not accept? (*) What are the things that nothing will fix (even if you *do* fix it?!)? (*) What can’t
you keep out? (*) What destabilizes you? (*) How do you know/tell what’s actually real? (*) Who are you and what should
you do? (*) What class of person are you and what should you do? (*) What in-group versus out-group are you really truly
in? (*) What automatically makes someone a parent or an adult or The Man or The System? (Automatically makes it so that
those things are real and someone must be seen as an agent or personification of one of them?) (*) What is the fabric of
your world? (that completely comprises it, or parts of it, with nothing left over) (*) What must the world be? What must
you be and what must other people be for the world to be(come) that? (*) What are the limits of your knowledge of
outside this moment? What are the limits of your knowledge of the future? What do you and can you know about this
moment? What do you and can you know about the future? What do you and can you know about outside this moment? (* [jd])
If you had a remote (or option) that could fast forward through time (you'd still be living your life but would "wake
up" at a future moment), what would you do? Would you use it? would you do it? (* [h]) Under what circumstances would
you betray your loved ones/yourself/your ideals in order to survive? [what’s that like?] (* [h]) What dead ends are you
heading toward or stuck at? (*) What has been the same or unchanging since your earliest memory? (*) Why do you expect
everything to work, versus suffering, failure, disappointment, harm? (*) Why do/did you think anything was/is going to
work out at all? (preconceiving/presupposing X) (*) Why do/did you think you were an agent with (a) goal(s) at all?
(preconceiving/presupposing X) (*) Where is the future seated? In there? In here? Up there? Out there? (*) Where are
goals seated? In there? In here? Up there? Out there? (*) Where is *the* goal seated? In there? In here? Up there? Out
there? (*) What are you wrapped around? (*) True of false and why: “I”(?) believe “I’m”(?) evil and therefore
undeserving. (*) What would happen if you basked in the goodness of your seeming/provisional perfect irredeemability?
(*) Where is the sky judge? How can it/they be known? (*) What mouse are you to what reality cat? (*) Where are the
credentialers, the certifiers? (*) What if, whatever all this actually is, is ok? (*) What if life is suffering? (*)
What if you’re being utterly carried and held in this physical world, this very moment, and this one? (*) What would
happen if you were ok? (*) What are all the ways actual empathy could work? (*) What are all the ways perspective-taking
could work? (*) Are you a person, through-and-through? Is it safe to not be a wholly a person or to not be a person,
when/if needed? (repeat? *) Are you willing to have X forever? (repeat? *) Are you willing to be exactly this way
forever? How would that look? What would you do right now in that world? (*) What is the true/actual (self-)language of
the body(mind)? (*) What is your lifeworld built out of? (*) What for you is context bound? (*) Are you a person in the
world? (*) What glues together ongoing narrative?



p9: Explore what your “normal ideal day” would be like, do this imaginatively, generatively, “concretely immersively.”
That is, as best you can, experience it as if you’re actually there, in the first person, in real time, in full sensory
and perspectival detail, including inner experience.

So, this includes, but is not limited to, your thoughts, feelings, everything, successes, failures, ease, challenges,
rote tasks, fun tasks, texts or artifacts you’ll write/create or consult as you’re doing so, the reactions you get, how
people respond…, how you feel, who will be there…, includes experiences of planning, expecting, anticipating…,
remembering, thinking (content of those thoughts), beliefs, willing, doing…, how you feel in your body from first
person, how you think about your body, what you want the whole world around you to be like, how the whole world works,
your past accomplishments, you expectations of future success, your imminent experience of the past, present, and
future.

This is not a concentration exercise. It’s ok to do it partially and imperfectly. Planning and reverie and (seeming)
off-topic-ness are ok.

See if you can minimally effortfully do this, with as much allowing as possible. If anything gets stuck or jammed, let
go and try something different. No forcing.

Let go as you do this. Allow what you thought you wanted to change endlessly (if it does). Also, try not to impose on
what you want. What you want right now is what you want to the degree that it’s safe to want it. What you want can
change to the degree that it’s safe to want it right now.

Again, experiential/sensory/qualitative, first-person concreteness is what’s key to this practice. Concreteness.

Additionally, with respect to “ideal,” above, also consider “intrinsic motivation,” what is “intrinsically motivating.”
(The use of this phrase is intended to capture a certain pre-reflective ease, excitement, interest, and drive and is not
intended to be a theoretical or ontological commitment.)

Also, holism is key to this practice, at least as something to keep in mind. The experience you’re exploring is a slice
of an entire life, a slice of an entire universe, moments in an entire consciousness. Holism. Unity. Wholeness.
Unifiedness. Seamlessness. Simultaneity. All together, all at once.

If you find that the concreteness is “too much detail” in that you “don’t care” about certain details and would prefer
thinking more abstractly, see if you can fill in that “don’t care” (non-)detail with something concrete, and then see if
you can fill in that detail with something intrinsically motivating. You don’t have to keep it. You can let it go
afterwards. “You have to fill your days with something.”

You might find you can’t do parts of this or can’t do any of it at all. You might be blocked or cut off or cut out. This
might be because you have the experience of being not allowed, or too selfish, or what you want is too childish,
impossible, immoral, evil, pathetic, hurtful, dangerous, too hard, to risky, imaginary, a fantasy.

If that’s the case, just do the best you can. You might try, for each objection, to see if you can correct or handle
that objection. If you cannot, just let it go for now; choose another practice and come back later, as with all the
practices. Here you can also mix in practice [p2], the willing/doing practice.

Finally, all the above is the canonical, main practice. And/but, you can also try similar things with “the rest of the
day,” e.g. when you wake up you can concretely explore your ideal rest of the day. You can do something similar for
“tomorrow” and finally “goals” and “milestones” if those sorts of things are in your felt ontology.



p10: [experimental] This practice might be called “minimal unit partially ordered imaginative/generative concrete
planning.” That is, in some sense, it is a planning practice.

Explore what you want and what you might do by imagining/generating immersive, concrete experience, as if you’re fully
living it, in two subsequent moments. And repeat.

first person concrete experiential qualities in —> first person concrete experiential qualities out



theory:

incomplete, alternative renderings:

A collaborator (mh) notes:

I find myself mentally replacing much of the "will" or "intent" language in the protocol (particularly p2) with
something like "invite" or "permit,” both of which feel like "cleaner" versions of doing something volitional
(cleaner=less mental baggage).


Another collaborator (jd) notes (paraphrased):

Regarding doing, willing, etc., and different understandings of the underlying concepts, the ontology of course being
imperfect to begin with, there can be a distinction between more volitional doings and less volitional doings. And,
there’s a way in which doings can feel more and less willful, from effortful to having a “nondoing” flavor. And, there’s
an important distinction between the two: I can do a very topdown, or willful, willing or doing or there can be
bottom-up doings, that are just kind of happening on their own. And there can be more bottom-up intention [will] as a
companion to willing. And they feel very different. I’ve been inclining more towards surrender, but there’s still been a
lot of doing going on. More precisely, I’m less and less the one doing the doings, in a way that happens more easily and
on its own. And the word I’m using is “allowing,” or I’m allowing it. The doings are allowed, somehow, and maybe being
lightly facilitated by me. It’s not like the practice is missing doing, it’s just light and gentle. […] Where I got
stuck was doings and willings that were more an exercise of will versus allowing that was more bottom-up.


I note/respond:

the p2 language has [and has had, for a long time] “allow” and “participate” on the backend, but, yeah, this is coming
up more with people. [One reason I haven’t emphasized top-down versus bottom-up, in the main practices, is that the
distinction, eventually, in some sense collapses. Or, the line gets ever more blurred, or it very saliently moves. Some
of the preliminary/auxiliary practices intentionally have a bottom-up flavor, e.g. “be moved.” Also, the baked-in
emphasis on ability/can/can’t hopefully gives a flavor of circumscribing problematic top-down-ness. All that said,] I’m
wondering if there could be something more explicit [or front-loaded, in the main practices, to help good things happen
maybe sooner]. so instead of:

will/intend/[…] :: ~surrender … “allow or participate in that happening” do :: undo … “allow or participate in that
happening”

maybe should be more like:

will/intend/invite/permit/facilitate […] ::surrender […] “allow or participate […]” do/non-do :: undo […] “allow or
participate […]

reminding myself the current structure of p2:

2 main parts will/do, each with two subparts will/surrender, do/undo, each with three subparts: good/bad/can’t

notes on a couple takes/facets metaphysics of causation:

necessary sufficient necessary and sufficient neither necessary nor sufficient cause/start stop/end prevent/block enable
facilitate retard/inhibit


I offered another partial schema, that maybe doesn’t front-load or specially emphasize “bottom-up” but is more
explicitly balanced about this:

top-down willing top-down willing-to-enable plus bottom-up doing (and participating) top-down blocking-to-enable plus
bottom-up doing (and participating) top-down allowing-to-enable plus bottom-up doing (and participating) top-down
inviting-to-enable plus bottom-up doing (and participating) top-down permitting plus bottom-up doing (and participating)
top-down surrender (and participating) top-down surrender-to-enable plus bottom-up doing (and participating) top-down
doing top-down doing-to-undo / redoing-to-undo top-down doing-to-enable plus bottom-up undoing top-down
blocking-to-enable plus bottom-up undoing top-down allowing-to-enable plus bottom-up undoing top-down inviting-to-enable
plus bottom-up doing top-down permitting plus bottom-up undoing top-down surrender top-down surrender-to-enable plus
bottom-up undoing bottom-up doing-to-undo / redoing-to-undo



creativity(/unsticking) protocol:


what to do when nothing's happening/working:

[stub]

Sometimes, especially somewhere near the very beginning, or eventually, it seems like nothing's happening, or nothing's
working, or nothing's changing, or things are just as bad, or things are changing but nothing's actually getting better,
or absolutely nothing is happening at all.

In these times, maybe counterintuitively, it can be helpful to incline towards doing ever-less, not more. Trying and
experimenting and "thrashing" can be loud. They can make it harder to detect subtle and new (to you; or old) [SUBTLE]
POSITIVE LEAD INDICATORS.

These might be things like subtle, distant puffs of relief, subtle, over-the-shoulder,
was-already-there-at-least-in-the-moment-before memories or insights, subtle changes in muscle tension, and so on. And,
it can also be very counterintuitive things or things that maybe feel bad but are actually in the right direction,
slight changes in the "pattern of pixels" (not to inappropirately reify any of that), maybe a little patch in a region
of bigger "pixels." Or voxels, or definitely don't inappropriately reify anything like pixels, voxels, space, time,
etc., anything.

More: right-there-over-your-shoulder-there-all-along-at-least-for-a-little-bit creeping sense of something, a faint
dreamy, dreamlike dawning around the edges, little phenomenological glimmers in strange inner spaces, little bits of
somatic/muscle refactoring, faint, distant puffs of “relief,” somatic tingles...

So, it's important to explore how to "take the foot off the gas," sometimes, in times like these, to make it easier to
detect and discern and find SUBTLE POSITIVE LEAD INDICATORS (which won't necessarily feel good, but "feels good" is an
excellent heuristic).

You might in particular explore the "do less" preliminary/auxiliary practice. It's not a panacea and, in my opinion, it
generally won't take people "all the way," as per this whole document, but it's a good thing to explore while being
careful of tangling or counterproductiveness, perhaps via the meta protocol.

Over time, one can use patterns and meta-patterns to approximately predict aspects of the future.

>>>
https://twitter.com/meditationstuff/status/1301623971323015168

[...] over time, one learns patterns of subtle lead indicators allowing navigation across larger & larger
nonmonotonicities, to months of hardness where you're barely 51% sure, if that, that you're doing the right thing. it's
fallible but practically doable, cf. buddha nature, etc. [...] <<<

An example of the the above is knowing that even though things actually feel worse, you're 51% confident that something
better is on the other side.

Another example is, suddenly, you seemingly know *less* about something than you did before, but you stably rest in
this, you don't claw back to knowing, you rest in this new unknowing (because you're confident that it's ok to do it,
safe to do it, and you can do it), for seconds, minutes, many minutes, or a day or two, and you come out the other side,
better off, knowing more or knowing differently.


creativity(/unsticking) protocol:

Intructions:

(*) Do something you’ve never done before, that you can do and seems safe enough and ok to do, as best you can currently
tell. (*) Repeat, over and over again, as needed.

Notes: (*) In addition to "doing" something you've never done before, you might try bottom-up "allowing" or surrendering
to something you've never allowed or surrendered to before (if it seems safe enough and ok enough). You might
"participate" in something you've never participated in before... (*) Maybe that "something you've never done before" is
wholly novel or maybe it's something deeply familiar, with a glimmer of novelty. (*) Maybe that "something you've never
done before" is something *have* done before but you're doing it in a new way/manner, perhaps with a new implicit or
explicit adverb, or, if it's transitive, you're doing it to a new thing. (*) If you have no "degrees of freedom," don't
force. Just wait. (*) If you have very few "degrees of freedom," you might have to go “backwards” or “sideways” for a
long time, through familiar things, to actualize the totally new thing, or it definitely might be immediately available
or almost immediately available (*) In addition to "safe enough" and "ok," you might also choose things that are fun,
interesting, tolerable, engaging, attractive, exciting, strange, weird, things that youre curious about... (*) If you're
very at a loss, you might go through preliminary/auxilliary practices you haven't tried. Or, whether or not you have
tried them all, you might take p/a practices and change words or write them in your own words, and then that's your new
thing. You can keep modifying them as per your intuitive interest or sense that they might be the right thing to do. (*)
This might expand the space of things to do so much that it might be (even more) paralyzing, if you were already
paralyzed on some dimensions. Will this work/terminate/something? Yes, Buddha nature, etc. Keep mixing in
preliminary/auxiliary practices, main practices, the meta protocol, other tools, etc.



interpersonal practice:



formulation 1 (including Many Protocol): (strategy flavored; mutual epistemics flavored)

A move M could be in the context of conversational or other local, real time interaction. Or a move M could be composite
and part of a long-term plan. So, a move could be right here and now (or soon), taking place, once initiated, in a
single moment or across a small number of contiguous moments, or a move can be planned for future, as part of a global
strategy, or anywhere in between. And the number of people considered can be from n=2 to n=billions.

Less obvious moves, in addition to particularly other-directed moves: “non”-moves, receptive moves, waiting patiently
moves, self-care moves, time out and stopping temporarily or for a longer duration moves, being-helped moves (e.g.
free-associating, saying what’s most bad, saying don’t feel safe disclosing X, saying prefer not to do X without
explanation or apology), listening quietly, going with the flow of what the other person is doing…

And, to be sure, we’re “moving”/“move-ing”/making-moves continuously and contiguously. We can’t turn it off. Any “non
move” is a move.


It can be helpful, when doing the many protocol with new people, to start with just five minutes at a time, maybe trying
five minutes just once in a single day, then five minutes again or ten minutes the next day, and so on. If it’s not
working, don’t force it! Just do solo meditation or some other group activity.

It can also be helpful to start very far apart! Everyone ten to thirty feet away from each other! And then move in
slowly over minutes or even days.


0. Consider at least n=2 people: A (you) and B (someone else)

1. Consider a provisional move M that you can take. (Some possibly counterintuitive valid moves M could be e.g. “waiting
   attentively” or “hopefully being genuinely attentive and responsive while simultaneously planning a move.”)
2. Classify M as one of the below: a) bad for A and bad for B b) bad for A and good for B c) good for A and bad for B d)
good for A and good for B
3. For the selected classification in (2), of (a)-(d), classify this classification further as one of the below: a)
believed false by A and believed false by B and actually false b) believed false by A and believed false by B and
actually true c) believed false by A and believed true by B and actually false d) believed false by A and believed true
by B and actually true e) believed true by A and believed false by B and actually false f) believed true by A and
believed false by B and actually true g) believed true by A and believed true by B and actually false h) believed true
by A and believed true by B and actually true
4. Carry out the move M or return to (1). Of course, you can return to (1) at any time as your real time interaction
   unfolds or other conditions change.


alternative presentation:

Consider two or more people, A and B or A and B, C, D, E… Consider a potentially taken move M, under consideration.
Consider that the status of M if taken is exactly one of the following: Believed good for A by A and believed good for B
[, C, D, E…] by B and actually good for A and actually good for B. […] Believe bad for A by A and believed bad for B by
B and actually bad for A and actually bad for B.


alternative presentation: [yay = good; bleh = bad] “Many Protocol” (Last updated: 2019-09-06; 09:19 CDT)

[See some interesting definitions in Appendix 2]

1. Let there be A and B, which comprise a group G. A is a single person. B could be a single person or multiple people.

2. Person A considers a move M. M can be (a) physically verbal, physical nonverbal, mental, or even (b) a “non-move
that’s still a move.” Examples of (a): a verbal observation, verbal question, a verbal request, a quizzical look, a
shrug, eye contact... Examples of (b): thinking about what to say, waiting patiently, waiting patiently with an open
mind, leaving the vicinity temporarily… Moves can be complex, that is, moves can be made of submoves that are
simultaneous and/or sequential in time.
 
3. Now, say, something can be “yay” or “bleh” for someone. And, something can be *believed* to be yay or bleh for
   someone, *by* someone. And, two or more people, at a particular time, might disagree as to whether a particular
   something is yay or bleh (for someone or in general). Also, say, for our purposes, that there’s a fact of the matter
   or a ground truth, that that particular something is actually/truly (contextually, for a particular person at a
   particular time) yay or bleh, with no other possibilities. And let those possibilities be possibilities for M. That
   is, we can have a big list (exactly 64 items) of things that could be the case for M, where only one entry/line in
   the list is true at a particular time. That list is in Appendix 1.

4. Now, so, person A selects and makes the best move M they can make, in consideration of as many moves as they have
   time to consider, and in consideration of the 64 possible classifications of moves (in Appendix 1).

5. So, now, the move has been made, and results have obtained. And, now, everyone in G implicitly or explicitly chooses
   a new A and B(s). Now, go to (1) or (6).

6. If things are moving smoothly and slowly, then, at any particular time, with perhaps some periodic indeterminateness,
   there is only one A and everyone else is a B. If things are moving smoothly and more quickly, then everyone is
   simultaneously, at the same time, at all times, both an A and B. Now, go to (1).

appendix 1:

(1) M is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed
yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (2) M is believed
yay for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s)
by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (3) M is believed yay for A by A and
believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and
actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (4) M is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for A
by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh
for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (5) M is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and
believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and
actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (6) M is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed
yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly
bleh for (all) B(s). (7) M is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all)
B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly yay for (all)
B(s). (8) M is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and
believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (9) M
is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay
for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (10) M is believed yay
for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by
(all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (11) M is believed yay for A by A and
believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and
actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (12) M is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for
A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly
bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (13) M is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for A by (all)
B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A
and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (14) M is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and
believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and
actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (15) M is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed
bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly
yay for (all) B(s). (16) M is believed yay for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all)
B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all)
B(s). (17) M is believed yay for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and
believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (18) M is
believed yay for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for
(all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (19) M is believed yay for
A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by
(all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (20) M is believed yay for A by A and
believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and
actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (21) M is believed yay for A by A and believed bleh
for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and
actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (22) M is believed yay for A by A and believed bleh for
A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly
yay for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (23) M is believed yay for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all)
B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A
and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (24) M is believed yay for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and
believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and
actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (25) M is believed yay for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed
bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly
yay for (all) B(s). (26) M is believed yay for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all)
B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly bleh for (all)
B(s). (27) M is believed yay for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and
believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (28) M is
believed yay for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for
(all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (29) M is believed yay
for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s)
by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (30) M is believed yay for A by A and
believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s)
and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (31) M is believed yay for A by A and believed bleh
for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and
actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (32) M is believed yay for A by A and believed bleh for
A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly
bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (33) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all)
B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and
actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (34) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed
yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly
bleh for (all) B(s). (35) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all)
B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly yay for (all)
B(s). (36) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and
believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (37) M
is believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh
for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (38) M is believed bleh
for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by
(all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (39) M is believed bleh for A by A and
believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and
actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (40) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for
A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly
bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (41) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all)
B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A
and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (42) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and
believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and
actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (43) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed
bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly
yay for (all) B(s). (44) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all)
B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all)
B(s). (45) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and
believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (46) M is
believed bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh
for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (47) M is believed
bleh for A by A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all)
B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (48) M is believed bleh for A by
A and believed yay for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all)
B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (49) M is believed bleh for A by A and
believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and
actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (50) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed bleh for
A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly
yay for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (51) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all)
B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A
and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (52) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and
believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and
actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (53) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and
believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and
actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (54) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed
yay for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly
bleh for (all) B(s). (55) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all)
B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly yay for (all)
B(s). (56) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed yay for (all) B(s) by A and
believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (57) M
is believed bleh for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay
for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (58) M is believed bleh
for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s)
by (all) B(s) and actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (59) M is believed bleh for A by A
and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all)
B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (60) M is believed bleh for A by A and
believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed yay for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s)
and actually/truly bleh for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (61) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed
bleh for A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and
actually/truly yay for A and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (62) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed bleh for
A by (all) B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly
yay for A and actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s). (63) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all)
B(s) and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A
and actually/truly yay for (all) B(s). (64) M is believed bleh for A by A and believed bleh for A by (all) B(s) and
believed bleh for (all) B(s) by A and believed bleh for (all) B(s) by (all) B(s) and actually/truly bleh for A and
actually/truly bleh for (all) B(s).

appendix 2:

yay = the true nature of yay must come to be understood over time; one’s understanding will be revised again and again,
possibly calling it by many names along the way bleh = the true nature of bleh must come to be understood over time;
one’s understanding will be revised again and again, possibly calling it by many names along the way sacredness =
rightly or wrongly it would currently be catastrophically, critically bad if this [sacred]
seemingly/apparently/expectedly extremely heartrendingly/body-rendingly good thing X were not actually
good/true/real/obtaining/existing/something/etc illusion = for better or worse, something that is not actually
true/real/obtaining/existing/something/etc inversion = incorrectly believing that something bad is good or that
something good is bad (contextually, generally, universally, something, etc.) resignation = deciding (perhaps in the
distant past and having forgotten) to never (try to) get some good thing, person, place, situation, context, experience
deferral = deciding (perhaps in the distant past and having forgotten) to get a good thing (perhaps much, much, much
later) disgust/revulsion/hate/rejection = response to being seemingly or actually choicelessly/inevitably felt subject
to past or expected, seeming or actual (felt) harm/hurt you currently lack the ability to [i.e. can’t] adequately
predict, control, or repair with negligible enough opportunity cost
atonement/reparations/restitution/redemption/apology/repair =  love = abstract and/or felt and/or skillful concrete
actions arising from accepting a person, place, or thing exactly as they are, have been, and will be/become (it is, has
been, and will be/become) compassion/care = abstract and/or (heart)felt and/or skillful concrete actions arising from
the felt desire/want, need, longing of a person (or persons, specific or general or universal) or other feeling/mindful
being near or far to be free from suffering loving-kindess/kindness/care (metta) = abstract and/or (heart)felt and/or
skillful concrete actions arising from the felt desire/want, need, longing of a person (or persons, specific or general
or universal) or other feeling/mindful being near or far to be happy/joyful/satisfied/satiated/complete/content wisdom =
ability to take skillful action; ability to not have to make hard, terrible choices; ability to realize when a choice
between bad and worse is an illusion self-transformation, cranking [like turning a crank], bootstrapping = the
production of wisdom on the path = ability and propensity to self-transform, crank, bootstrap no matter one’s current
level of wisdom full/complete X = X that contains no inversions belongingness = being in a stable situation where you
are able to knowingly, reflectively accept, receive, experience (relatively or completely) full/complete/non-inverted
love, compassion, and kindness, etc. connection, mutual belongingness = you get to be completely you, you can go
anywhere in yourself and come back with with anything, and so can the other people around you, and it’s ok; it's safe
(and good) for you and them, all the way down (ideally) wise, mutual belongingness = stable community in the face of
uncertainty, inversion, and resource constraints along many dimensions


formulation 2: (persuasion flavored)

For (A), (B), (C) and (D) is that relevant ability of mine veridical and veridically obvious? [If not can I veridically
and veridically obviously recursively gain the ability?] And, for (A), (B), (C) and (D) is exercising that relevant
ability of mine sufficiently low-cost in itself? And, for (A), (B), (C) and (D) is exercising that relevant ability of
mine sufficiently low-cost in terms of (external) opportunity cost, i.e. is there no better thing to do than exercising
these (A), (B), (C) and (D)? And, for (A), (B), (C) and (D) is it actually, truly, veridical and veridically obvious
no-brainer good for me to exercise these particular (A), (B), (C) and (D)?

(A) Can I cause or “cause” it to be the case, through action or inaction, that for person P (doing) X (*immediately or
at a definite future time or at an indefinite future time but sufficiently soon for me and inevitably) is an obvious
no-brainer for them, and with recognizably obviously no better alternative, that (doing) X (*) is essentially a
recognizable-to-them need? [with no false positives and no false negatives, that is they see perfectly clearly exactly
what it will do for them as well as whether or not that’s net good, and, even better this is in no way distressing?] Is
it the case that person P finds that doing X (*immediately or at a definite future time or at an indefinite future time
but sufficiently soon for me and inevitably) is an obvious no-brainer for them, that doing X (*) is essentially a
recognizable-to-them need? (B) Can I cause or “cause” it to be the case, through action or inaction, that person P’s
expectations for having done X are perfectly fulfilled immediately, mediately for all mediates, and terminally? Is it
the case that person P’s expectations for having done X are perfectly fulfilled immediately, mediately for all mediates,
and terminally? (C) Can I cause or “cause” it to be the case, through action or inaction, that the effects of person P
having done X, immediately, mediately for all mediates, and terminally, are good for person P? Is it the case that the
effects of person P having done X, immediately, mediately for all mediates, and terminally, are good for person P? (D)
Can I cause or “cause” it to be the case, through action or inaction, that the effects of person P having done X,
immediately, mediately for all mediates, and terminally, are, immediately and retrospectively, recognizably-to-them,
no-brainer, veridical and veridically seemingly obviously good for person P? Is it the case that the effects of person P
having done X, immediately, mediately for all mediates, and terminally, are recognizably-to-them, no-brainer, veridical
and verdically obviously good for person P?

Finally, will this inevitably and obviously be a net benefit to everyone?

Can I cause people to know what’s good for me? Can I cause people to understand the synergy of reciprocity? Can I cause
people to long-term coordinate with me? Can I give people a reason to long-term coordinate with me? Actually these are
all superfluous or they are abilities that follow from the original ability lay down..

Good for everyone and everything. Strategically helping; recognizably good cascades…


formulation 3: (after Leibniz)

What is the best of all possible worlds? How do I/you know? What does this imply for my action?


formulation 4: (after Kant’s Categorical Imperative)

What would anyone ideally do in my exact situation? If a random person were perfectly airdropped into my exact being and
situation, what is the best thing they could do?

via e.g.:
http://www.qcc.cuny.edu/socialsciences/ppecorino/MEDICAL_ETHICS_TEXT/Chapter_2_Ethical_Traditions/Categorical_Imperative.htm
The Formula of the Law of Nature: "Act as if the maxim of your action were to become through your will a universal law
of nature." The Formula of the End Itself: "Act in such a way that you always treat humanity, whether in your own person
or in the person of any other, never simply as a means, but always at the same time as an end." The Formula of Autonomy:
"So act that your will can regard itself at the same time as making universal law through its maxims." The Formula of
the Kingdom of Ends: "So act as if you were through your maxims a law-making member of a kingdom of ends."


formulation 5: (mutual knowledge)

* = know/believe/think/imagine/expect/predict/anticipate/retrospectively interpret You know that I know that you know
that X is good. You know that I know that you know that Y is bad I know that you know that I know that that same X is
good. I know that you know that I know that that same Y is bad. We have mutual understanding that X is good. We have
mutual understanding that Y is bad.


Notes: (*) voluntary exchange, mutually beneficial exchange, atomic transactions, atomic swap, mutually beneficial
noncoercive exchange (*) co-doing, co-moves, simultaneous complementary moves, we, separation, nonseparation, no
boundary, etc. (*) “Be good to each other.” (*) “Do the best you can to do exactly the right thing for both you and the
other person, simultaneously, in each moment.” (*) “Act compassionately.”; “Act compassionately, taking into account all
time horizons and all possible futures.”


formulation 6:

(*) If something feels bad, then something is bad, somewhere, somehow, and it’s ok to completely stop any particular
thing, or the whole thing, at any time, smoothly or abruptly, if that’s what feels right. (If something has changed for
the worse, it’s ok to reverse or revert, to walk anything back, too, if you want to, that you don’t like or find you
don’t like, when you find it’s time to do so, immediately or later.) If in person, you can leave the room any time. If
online, you can turn off your mic, turn off your speakers, turn off your video, etc.

(*) Moment by moment, sensitively, responsively, patiently:

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *good* for both/all of you for you to somehow *lead*, in some somewhat particular
way or not, and you can do so, start doing so or continue to do so; top-down or bottom-up, actively or passively, do,
allow, surrender, release, participate in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the relevant ones of
those, incline towards completely stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for which you can’t, at
least for just right now.

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *bad* for both/all of you for you to somehow *lead*, and you can stop or not start
leading in that way, do that; top-down or bottom-up, actively or passively, do, allow, surrender, release, participate
in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the relevant ones of those, incline towards completely
stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for which you can’t, at least for just right now.

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *good* for both/all of you for you to somehow *follow*, in some somewhat
particular way or not, and you can do so, start doing so or continue to do so; top-down or bottom-up, actively or
passively, do, allow, surrender, release, participate in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the
relevant ones of those, incline towards completely stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for
which you can’t, at least for just right now.

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *bad* for both/all of you for you to somehow *follow*, and you can stop or not
start following in that way, do that; top-down or bottom-up, actively or passively, do, allow, surrender, release,
participate in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the relevant ones of those, incline towards
completely stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for which you can’t, at least for just right
now.

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *good* for both/all of you for you to somehow *coerce*, in some somewhat
particular way or not, and you can do so, start doing so or continue to do so; top-down or bottom-up, actively or
passively, do, allow, surrender, release, participate in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the
relevant ones of those, incline towards completely stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for
which you can’t, at least for just right now.

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *bad* for both/all of you for you to somehow *coerce*, and you can stop or not
start coercing in that way, do that; top-down or bottom-up, actively or passively, do, allow, surrender, release,
participate in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the relevant ones of those, incline towards
completely stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for which you can’t, at least for just right
now.

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *good* for both/all of you for you to somehow *resist*, in some somewhat
particular way or not, and you can do so, start doing so or continue to do so; top-down or bottom-up, actively or
passively, do, allow, surrender, release, participate in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the
relevant ones of those, incline towards completely stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for
which you can’t, at least for just right now.

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *bad* for both/all of you for you to somehow *resist*, and you can stop or not
start resisting in that way, do that; top-down or bottom-up, actively or passively, do, allow, surrender, release,
participate in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the relevant ones of those, incline towards
completely stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for which you can’t, at least for just right
now.

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *good* for both/all of you for you to somehow *phase-lock*, in some somewhat
particular way or not, and you can do so, start doing so or continue to do so; top-down or bottom-up, actively or
passively, do, allow, surrender, release, participate in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the
relevant ones of those, incline towards completely stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for
which you can’t, at least for just right now.

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *bad* for both/all of you for you to somehow *phase-lock*, and you can stop or not
start phase-locking in that way, do that; top-down or bottom-up, actively or passively, do, allow, surrender, release,
participate in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the relevant ones of those, incline towards
completely stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for which you can’t, at least for just right
now.

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *good* for both/all of you for you to somehow *desynchronize/decorrelate*, in some
somewhat particular way or not, and you can do so, start doing so or continue to do so; top-down or bottom-up, actively
or passively, do, allow, surrender, release, participate in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the
relevant ones of those, incline towards completely stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for
which you can’t, at least for just right now.

(**) If, as far as you can tell, it’s *bad* for both/all of you for you to somehow *desynchronize/decorrelate*, and you
can stop or not start desynchronizing/decorrelating in that way, do that; top-down or bottom-up, actively or passively,
do, allow, surrender, release, participate in that happening. If you know or find you can’t do any of the relevant ones
of those, incline towards completely stopping any of your trying to do so, for those relevant ones for which you can’t,
at least for just right now.



lists and more:

A few of these sections are sort of “less clear” in some ways than the main practices. Those are sort of “noncanonical”
in some sense. I’m not sure how to slice and dice all this yet



nonmonotonicity:

So, I suspect the way it goes is, there will be something both so bad and so difficult to change that a person tries
everything and then becomes a systematic meditator.

And then a person it meditating and all sorts of things start to get better, but, highly disconcertingly, the deepest
worst stuff that can barely look at or can’t look at it all seemingly starts to get worse.

And then finally, finally, finally, finally, finally hundreds but likely a thousand or two thousand hours in, or more,
that very worst thing uncoils. (With sometimes intermediate mini-uncoilings.)

I think the combination of intermediate very hard things getting better (when nothing else was really touching them)
combined with short- and long-range nonmonotonicities. “So much getting better! So much getting worse?!” makes all this
very confusing even if you sort of know what’s going on.



definitions:

[…] revert = return to a previous state knowing = experiencing assertoric and implicational representational content or
associated recorded sensations understanding = experiencing ontological/existential and causal representational content
or associated recorded sensations action for X = something that is volitional or potentially volitional for X. good =
“just good” or goodness/meaning/significance/purpose/value or good for goodness/meaning/significance/purpose/value will
= will(/intend/plan) [that P]; do something volitional that alters expectations for future in a specific way
acting/doing/do =
do/act/cause/maintain/enable/incept/start/prevent/block/stop/end/facilitate/retard/stabilize/change/think/know/sense/feel/have
part
in/querying/asking/wondering/imagining/storytelling/narrating/what-if-ing/solving/solutioning/what-would-they-do-ing/questioning/assessing/judging/evaluating/participate/push/pull/attend/image/envision/visualize/interrupt/preempt/interleave/substitute/switch/meaning-making/meaning-dissolving,
[language-ing, say-ing, word-ing, verbalizing, phrase-ing, sentence-ing, meaning-ing,] experimenting, waiting,
observing, interrupting X [note: this is the do/action “evocative-suggestion-laundry list”] denying = willful disbelief
in some such or thus manner/sense/way in opposition to some belief or seeming in something in some such or thus
manner/sense/way convincing = willful belief in some such or thus manner/sense/way (possibly) in opposition to some
belief or seeming in something in some such or thus manner/sense/way willing = [not exactly]
planning/intending/directly-make-it-so-ing willing = [not exactly] currently intending to make it so; to make X Y […]
awareness = [~~~that which contains “there it is as such”] knowledge = [~~~like not a direct phenomenological correlate
as such but may be corresponding quality/concept in awareness. more of a “seeming” flavor versus an “appearing” flavor]
[…]



undefined and explications:

[…] awareness experience sensation good bad good for X bad for X One can be aware of experience. A mind can be aware of
experience. Experience is a genus. Sensation is a species of experience. Knowing is a species of experience.
Understanding is a species of experience. Knowing and understanding are representation. Experience is solely composed of
knowing, understanding, and sensation. Experience is solely composed of representation and sensation. Representations
can (directly) refer/apply to apparent objects or attributes or sensations as such. A representation (directly)
represents something. Sensations can be “external” or “internal”. A proposition P is a representation that asserts what
is or may be. A concept (directly) represents something. A collection of connected/nonseparated propositions are/is a
model M. “Aware” in “become aware” is like if you’re aware of something then it’s “part of” awareness or “in” awareness.
and awareness is the whole thing. […]



bodymindenvironment:

Sensation and representation and belief and expectation, how are all these related? It can be hard at first to
experience things like “sensational imprint as such” or “representation as such” or both at once or are they two sides
of the same coin? The analogies below are wrong but possibly evocative…

body:mind sensations:meaning outside:inside experience:belief referent:representation sensing:knowing experience:belief
appearance:representation


can’t-look-yet (“avoidance”):

There will be thousands of things that are hard to “look at.” For any particular thing that you can’t look at, you won’t
be able to look at it until you can. Your mind figures eventually figures out how to make it safe to look, and then you
find yourself looking or you remember to look and you find that this time you can figure out how to do so.

Usually the way your mind figures out how to make it safe to look will be necessarily roundabout and indirect, in a way
that you couldn’t have planned or directed in advance. So it goes.

Nevertheless, it can sometimes be helpful to make a list of the classes of things that are hard to look at, as a way to
help your mind more quickly get it’s bearings. Below is a messy sample list of the kinds of things one might classify in
one’s mind as “avoidy” or “attention-redirecty.”

Low-grade anxiety Horror Terror Metaphysical horror Horribleness Terribleness Pointlessness Meaninglessness
Cold-water-Spray-bottle-kitten-shock-outrage-sick(-horror(-terror)) (This-)can’t-be-happening-ness
Hurt-by-others’-actions-ness hurt-by-others’-unhelpfulness Drama Melodrama Psychodrama Anything suppressed by the will
that feels bad being unsuppressed Really-was-upset(-about-that)-ness
Really/actually-was-really-bad(-at-the-time-it-was-happening)-ness Really-did-push-that-away-without-solving-it
Really-did/do-want(ed)-that-ness Just-can’t-ness Just-can’t-go-on-ness Plaintive-desperation-ness Can’t believe that
happened Can’t believe this is happening Remembered can’t believe this is happening
Haste/imminence_pressure/rushing/corner-cutting/force-it-through-ing cf (judged_)too_slow(_ness)
Wrongness/doing-the-wring-thing-ness/this-isn’t-working-ness/(judged_)too_slow(_ness) ?????doubt-in-method-ness
Frantic-ness Desperation ...sacredness ...unforgiveableness ...unthinkableness should(-be)-X needs/has-to-be-X
defending, resisting teeth-gritting, white-knuckling [will+redirection?...] blind/unresponsive-just-keep-going-ness [vs
a better version...] Relief(!)—I.e. anything can get tagged as “redirectively bad” “perpetuators”/“slack
grabbers”/“compulsive push-downs” Etc cf. the attention redirecting or aversive phenomenologies has to be uncrusty
exposure vs copy or (re)duplication~ facilitation via correct application of do nothing [some repeats below here]
Low-grade anxiety, panic, horribleness, fear, terror, terribleness, hopelessness, meaninglessness, surprise sudden soul-tap uninterpretable mortal physical peril terror even childhood nightmare/fantasy possibly extreme soul-gripping [perfect fear/intolerable/disgust experiential  

Again this is a hard thing to do willfully, and one shouldn’t do it forcefully, but it can be helpful to keep in mind
“(self-)cornering”, as in “nothing left to do but look” and “surfing up the terribleness gradients”, using experiential
badness as a way to prioritize and navigate. Sometimes badness will come up that seems tangiential or in reaction to
what you’re doing, but, in fact, it’s directly related, and in some sense should be prioritized.


systematicity:

If only one could make a list of what needs to be attended to, and then one could just go through the list.
Unfortunately, people’s ontology and ordering for what’s good to do when will be idiosyncratic and complex and evolving
and ultimately (often) very fine-grain

But, it does matter what you do when, and that’s part of wayfinding. But, when you just don’t know what to do, you can
be systematically experimental. This helps at least somewhat to keep from systematically leaving something out.

inner senses (inner/imagined audition, visual phenomena, talking/thinking in between senses (phosphene splotches behind
eyes, harmless tinnitus-like tones) outer senses valence/feel chakra-esque: crown/scalp, brow/face, throat/jaw,
back-base of skull, back of neck, heart, solar plexus, naval, dan tien, genitals, sacrum, coccyx, perineum (for the
mediate ones, both front and back of the body) meaning, nonsymbolic and liminally verbal knowing
slightly-out-of-phase-with-normal-attention-“inner space” that is both seemingly “in there” and in-there-“out there” or
“out there”-in-there… non-euclidean body-related space and “inner” space other “non-sensory” or
“non-traditionally-sensory” phenomenology stuff/things/experience that is “out there in the world” but somehow not
directly sensory, in character “body” or “mind” that’s somehow “outside” the skin or “somewhere else” skeletal muscles
(every last one of them) interoception (visceral organs, sinuses of the skull, pressure, heartbeat, peristalisis,
autonomic arousal, etc.) dermatomes (tiny random patches of skin/sensation all over, matter)
somatically-overlaid-energy-full-body-movement-anticipation-planning-space, “energy work” space, phantom/ghost/energy
hands space, “inner stance” space different frequencies/periodicities (Hz/milliseconds/half-seconds/seconds) of
sensation at different depths of the body from skin to bones and inside the bones all over [buzz, tick, waggle,
flickering, strobe, vibrate, tickle, wiggle, undulate, writhe, bounce] extremes: crown, perineum, hands, fingers,
fingertips, sides of the fingers, wrists, ankles, palms, toes, soles of the feet edges: backs/fronts/sides of the arms,
backs/fronts/sides of the legs creases: jaw/neck… boundaries: back-base of the skull… vestibular sense:
phantom/immersive/vertigo-like moving, translation, spinning, going upside down, rotating ki, qi, chi, ruach, prana,
energy… the “voluntariness of breathing” (versus the “involuntariness”)

Sometimes you might experimentally want to increase the rate and depth of breathing, if breathing has become too subtle
to offer certain kinds of systemic feedback.

also: the subtle movements of your eyes, the subtle movements of muscles in the back of your head and neck, subtle
movements of the tongue and jaw, glottis, lips, palate.

states can be important too: sexually aroused, not sexually aroused, desirous of sex, not desirous of sex, possibly
various states of emotional arousal

Finally, here are some ways that people systematically leave things out; as best you can make sure to not be
systematically avoiding anything, of course with fast moving mind (belief/expectation/thought/imagination/feared
possible truths and outcomes, etc.) and sensation stuff, but also old injuries, unsettling or unpleasant sensations
around permanent pins or staples from old surgeries, scars (injury or cosmetic), genital circumcision, feared body stuff
(cancer? precancer? did i fuck up nerve/ligament/tendon permanently? etc), phantom or feared teeth and jaw stuff,
unpleasant “wrong, nervy” stuff. or maybe you don’t like your hands or feet or stomach or thighs or something. don’t
avoid.


exhaustivity and bottlenecks:
 
don’t skip anything, don’t bypass anything, don’t force anything. don’t double-down, you’re probably missing something
somewhere else. if you accidentally force, reverse it as soon as you possibly can. rare, weird, unusual, surprising, or
uncommon stuff matters. it could be a clue to a systematic avoidance or a bottleneck. eventually you have to touch
everything in every way, think “everything,” believe “everything,” do “everything”, remember everything, often from
multiple angles, over and over again, in the right global order, though with plenty of room for backtracking and
mistakes. every good thing, every bad thing, every trauma, every childhood terror. it’s finite. don’t do so any session
indiscrimately; and catching small details can save dozens or hundreds of hours, tiny (or large) unexpected body
locations or depths from particular angles or along particular paths, far removed from each other in partially
repeating, complex orders; the right turn or surrender to memory or thought or reverie—spending hours painstakingly
untangling (local or distributed) X is worth it and necessary, interleaving doing that with large excursions to
elsewhere in body and mind may help you find what’s “secretly” blocking that untanglng. sleeping, watching tv,
conversing, throwing yourself into experience may offer clues to what to do next. it’s finite.

a too-clean sample pattern of attention: 1212121212121212121212… a too-clean sample pattern of attention:
11111121111111211111121111112… a too-clean sample pattern of attention:
1111111111111121111111111111113111111111111111211111111111113111111111… a too-clean sample pattern of attention:
11111111111111211111111111111131111111188575351111111211111111111113111111111… a too-clean sample pattern of attention:
023987aliurnnga5098126943098fkkdan5691694704958637lkrjnanf0912360989sdf7basf3g7avf…

“slow is smooth: smooth is fast”, blah blah

So sometimes things can look a lot like “contemporary classical noting practice.” [sic]


(mental action) and the attentional manifold:

When you’re “doing things” in meditation, with what are you doing it? Your muscles? Your mind? Your phantom/ghost hands?
Subtle or gross eye activity? Your jaw? The muscles in the back of your neck? The muscles in the back-base of the skull?
Are the big motions or small motions? Sweeping or perfectly still attention? Vague or pin-point precision? Two
dimensional, three dimensional, or conforming to a surface?


the use of the will:

one can of course will changes in life situation and that can be really good

the will stuff explicitly in the practice is (obviously? not obvious at all?) intended to largely be in relation to the
practice. some of it will be life goal stuff and intention stuff and planning stuff because of how all that is
“imminent” in the mind.

indeed, specifically things like “have this resolve without the use of force in a way that I retrospectively endorse”
<-- and keep error checking and tweaking the thing behind the words (and refining the words) “have this muscle tension
go away in a way that doesn’t fuck up something somewhere else” and there’s a very feely/modulatory quality to it, error
checking the willing as feedback starts to come in, ways the willing isn’t achieving or heading towards the right thing,
so somehow the “how” or the “endpoint” of the willing has something wrong with it

I’ll usually explicitly will something for brief periods, tweaking it as a I go, and then drop it when I eventually
understand how it’s problematic or it’s done enough work that doing something else practice-related is higher-value.

I’ll also examine what I’m already implicitly willing, what I’m already implicitly trying to have happen, because it
might be problematic. I might be pushing against something that’s not ready to move, or I might be trying to achieve
something problematic out in the world, in the what, how, when, or order. there might be something better to mediately
will that gets the same thing or better distally.

>>>
Jonathan [8:24 AM] […] for better or worse i have distinctions like (quick and nonexhaustive list):

possibly helpful theoretical distinctions
- winding vs unwinding (with correlates to tension)
- practice as global unwinding (in some sense), unification

practice diaries:
- tension solves
- piecing together memories
- (re-)understanding one's past
- holding the right things in attention
- emphasis on somatics <<<


using your time:

This is a very, very, very, very rough breakdown of how you might use your time while practicing. It could be more
granular, and all the percentages could be tweaked more. Note that each “level” adds up to 100%. For example, it’s
ballpark suggested that p2 might be 80% of 72% of your total practice time. Or, stated more imprecisely, if you’re doing
the protocol proper, explore doing lots of p2. These percentages may change as we learn more. For example, the ballpark
suggestion for doing the meta protocol might go down or up. Also, in the beginning you might spend much more time on the
preliminary/auxiliary practices, and so forth. These are intended to be the very-long-run breakdowns.

protocol 100% preliminary/auxiliary practices 4% other-person-inclusive practices 2% meta protocol 17% meta meta
	protocol 5% protocol 72% p0 1% p1 2% p2 80% p3 2% p4 2% p5 3% p6 2% p7 2% p8 2% p9 2% p10 2%

Important: It’s normal to “orbit” this document and the practices, to read this and put it down for a while, or to do
the practices and then do other life things for a while. There are many paths up the mountain and many often necessary
“detours,” which aren’t detours at all, of course.



a note on force (plus a brief mention of “redo-to-undo”):

[minimally edited placeholder transcript] I want to call this a brief note on Force. I've made it pretty clear in
different places to not be forcy. And I don't think I'll define forcy, here. But, there's something about getting
something to happen, something about threading a needle in a way that feels potentially bad. (Though it might only feel
slightly bad! It might feel like necessary-tradeoff progress. Try to avoid needle-threading in the first place! It might
almost never be worth it, if avoidable. Try to figure out or incline towards why it’s happening in the first place
versus something cleaner.) There's potentially a sense of effort. It can be extreme, subtle, or somewhere in between.

But let’s say needle-threading has already happening. Force has already been used in the system. (Usually there’s some,
or even a lot, even if there’s been minimal needle-threading. [And then, by definition-ish, there will have been force,
if there has been needle-threading.] Force is often a strategy that gets used, in any case, maybe prior to even having
started to meditate.)

There's a thing that the mind does, which is, in order to sort of do something for the last time or in order to sort of
undo something, the mind kind of like replays it or re-does it, that one last time.

So if a person is shying away from force completely, but there's already force in the system, then there's a way in
which it will be harder for that remaining force to get undone.

So sometimes it's important to surrender to or to go into that what is generally “not supposed to do,” (in this case,
force) so I don't want to say like globally don't be forcy. But sometimes subtly or not so-subtly ease into forcing, or
already existing forcing, or allow latent or hidden forcing to appear.

And this “going into,” or “allowing,” or “surfacing,” is for the purposes of sort of self-liberating that remaining
forcing or dissolving it or undoing it or undoing its leading edge.

So this is nuancing on top of the general but not universal principle of avoiding forciness or forcing. (And this
“redo-to-undo” principle/heuristic also more generally applies. See p2 for more pith pointers to this.)

Note on needle-threading or threading the needle: One can use needle-threading as sort of a neutral term, and there can
be good versions and bad versions. Neutrally, the term is intended to invoke a sense of “‘correctly’ navigating a narrow
path forward.” Good versions might be careful, gentle, precise that lead to ultimately stably expanded optionality. Bad
versions are sort of “carefully, precisely making a globally-net-negative tradeoff, making seeming local progress but
also ultimately making more work than if had done something different.” This latter version might sometimes feel like
“doing something that’s alongside or causing joint-grinding muscle tension, somewhere.” Use of the meta protocol can
help to determine whether a good version or bad version is happening or if it might be better to be doing something else
entirely. [The opposite of needle-threading might be “breadth-first-ing” [cf. depth-first-ing, too]. Both/all can be
good, for various reasons, at different times.]



meditating by coincidence:

Mark 1 day ago have you ever heard of so-called “coding by coincidence” i think from dykstra? he’s kind of a dinosaur
and it’s not the right thing to write careful proofs for one’s code before coding 99% of the time. but there’s a nice
thing in there, something like: maybe hope yes experiment but don’t guess? kind of? sort of going for exact knowledge of
what does what. or to know that if one does X, given this context, within 7-31 hours Y will happen, inevitably. sort of.


failure and other seemingly permanent and bad things:

Sometimes parts of the mind believe they will fail, even when, say, the rest of the mind believes in, say, trying and
hope and best-effort. Sometimes the way to help that part of the mind is to “fully go into it,” to (temporarily) fully
and completely believe that part, be that part, in such a way that you really believe that you will fail, or that you
have failed, even forever. This sometimes does not feel good (understatement) and can be scary, especially the first
time, and possibly every time (in the likely case that multiple parts of the mind believe that it will fail). But, in
that “fully going into it” that part of the mind ultimately relaxes, updates, realizes all the goodness around it and
comes to believe that it in fact will not fail. Sometimes you have to fully become something (bad) to become something
else (good) even if it temporarily takes you over. Remember that you don’t have to go into something until and if it’s
good and safe to do so and only when you in fact can do so. So don’t necessarily, say, try to up front find all the
places and ways that you will fail and then, say, try to fully believe that you will fail in that way. Engage p2, the
meta protocol, etc. Right time, right place, right manner, etc. (All of the same goes for failure, failing completely,
giving up hope, failing forever, forgetting completely, and other seemingly scary, bad, or permanent things.)


how bad does it have to get?:

[…] Today at 10:45 AM [Question/comment wondering if it might be possible to never have to “go into badness,” that, in
principle and possibly even in practice, whether there’s always a better option, and then there would be value of
reminding people of that over and over again in the world where it’s true.]

Mark 34 minutes ago I think it will be exquisitely personal/idiosyncratic/contextual, depending on the fine-grain
details of that person’s mind. Generally, there does seem to be an at least micro-redo-to-undo, mitigated or made safe
by equanimity and various other preparatory things. Agreed that wording and preconceptions will have significant
influence on “how bad things are,” though. I do somewhat less qualifying in the document, or a different pattern of
qualifying, because a lot of stuff sort of “comes out in the wash” with hundreds or thousands of hours of meditation.
And the meta protocol is also intended to help people correctly orient around interpretation of the instructions. I
certainly am not fully accurately calibrated and if I had more resources I would likely qualify more. There is a lot of
gentleness in the prelim/aux practices that is elided in the more terse main practices.

Mark 31 minutes ago There is also, I suppose, “the law of equal and opposite advice”--some people will shy away too much
from discomfort. And of course some people will flagellate themselves. I think, long-run, it’s very good to be able to
“go into badness”--this becomes ever more safe and constructive/productive over time, generally, I think. cf.
“equanimity”

Mark 31 minutes ago ever-less looping and piling on over time

Mark 27 minutes ago Sometimes (often) “a better thing” just isn’t locally available and one has to “keep going through
hell.” Other times a precise (and possibly necessarily personalized) reminder that something better is available makes a
colossal difference. And calibrating how and when to remind or not will be somewhat empirical, given patterns of
students, though of course deep principles could be elicited.

[…] 19 minutes ago […]

Mark < 1 minute ago I will note that there’s an important question here of how “soft/safe/gentle” [not to conflate
gentle and safe but they are correlated] meditation can be in the limit. If we understood this better, and I hope to,
plan to, intend to, in collaboration with others, it will make meditation accessible to a much wider range of people, in
a much wider range of life circumstances. If someone could trust that nothing particuarly terrible could happen or that
it would happen predictably, then it would be more likely they could do work/career/money and relationship/family things
while being a serious meditator. And that would be a much better world. This is an open area of research and an
extremely important area of research. Safety and effectiveness (including consistency, monotonicity, ease of starting,
initial palatability and interpretability, ideoloogical non-clashing, minimizing negative musculoskeletal involvement,
minimizing “temporary trauma,” ease of talking about with other people, everything.

[…] 10 minutes ago […]

Mark < 1 minute ago One way to resolve possible contradictions somehow involving badness being good is to make the
distinction between something feeling bad and something being bad. That is, one might accept that feeling bad can
sometimes be good. Further, to equivocate, one might accept that feeling bad can sometimes straightforwardly feel good!
(Some people will say, of course! cf. “hurts so good,” painful pleasure, massages, erotic pain, etc.)

The deeper thing, here, is something like “goodness” and “badness” are words and a person’s concepts of goodness and
badness will contextually, contingently, and idosyncratically apply to, and in the context of, complex phenomenology and
knowing that will be a complex mixture of valenced and unvalenced experience. And those concepts and that phenomenology
and the relationship between the two will change as life and meditation progresses.


extremity replay and creativity: panic, trauma, sexual arousal:

Sometimes old stuff will “come up” (come into awareness). Sometimes it will be obvious that it’s coming up to “burn off”
(become stably absent) and other times this won’t be obvious (or it needs to come up but it’s not yet time for it to
“burn off.”

The general principle is that sometimes the mind needs to at least partially re-experience something bad in order to
make sense of it or fully metabolize it so better things can happen in the future.

(Also, sometimes the mind, in the course of problem-solving puts together things in novel (and not entirely correct)
ways that are temporarily scary [terrifying] or otherwise bad [horrible].)

Sometimes this old or new stuff will be quite experientially extreme:

e.g. panic attacks, derealization, depersonalization, automaticity, edging into fugue states, air hunger, traumatic
sleep paralysis, distorted phenomenology, fragmented phenomenemogy, weird feeling ness, strange feeling ness, re-living
or de-novo inventing medical scares, feel like dying, feel having a stroke, confusion (from low blood sugar or a bad
trip or transient psychosis for whatever reason), “brain not working, “mind not working,” “feel like you’re going
[permanently] crazy,” “can’t think straight,” “feels like I’m dying/I am dying,” seeming or sense or awareness of
critical wrongness, “sleep or dream wrongness like vision or consciousness are distorted during dreaming, altered states
of consciousness from fevers or infections or metabolic or digestive or etc illness or fatigue or brain fog, or weird
transient consciousness-altering bloodflow hiccups for whatever reason, childhood night terrors or sleep disturbances or
panic attacks, suicidal ideation, suicidal impulse/urge, fuzziness, fogginess, unreality, static, chaos, dissolution,
dreaminess, drowsiness, liminality, (partial) loss of mental control or unified will, medical scares or realities for
yourself or friends or family, feel like you’re (re-/newly-)experiencing a traumatic event or someone else’s if you
witnessed it or helped by e.g. calling 911 or emergency services in your country, or overheard, or inferred, etc. —so go
to the e.r., have a friend talk you down, see a doctor about risk factors. If you’re experiencing an extreme event,
usually it’s just a mind thing and sometimes it’s a stroke, heart attack, etc. [Feeling out of control can sometimes
come with very aversive feelings but being feeling of control isn’t inherently bad and doesn’t necessarily lead to bad
outcomes. It can lead to good outcomes especially if that out-of-control-ness is burning off.]

When it’s safe, and usually it will be, you can learn (and likely need to learn, slowly, slowly, slowly, precisely, to
enter into these states and transform them from the inside.

I’m not a doctor but if you’re experiencing sudden and intense pain then go to the emergency room. If not then just
depends.

Sometimes the right thing to do is to not just let it be but to even facilitate whatever it is:

The right/good thing to do might be to go into fuzziness, into fog, into unclarity, temporarily and possibly for long
minutes or hours, again and again. This can be extremely counterintuitive when you’re, say, seeking crystalline clarity
or whatever turns out to be good (for you, in your concepts, mediately or ultimately).

Sometimes what comes up will at least partially feel good but might often feel in some ways unwanted or problematic:

An example of this is sexual fantasy and sexual arousal. A heuristic is that, if safe or sufficiently not costly, it’s
usually good to indulge the fantasy, imagine the scenario, read the erotic story, write the erotic story, search for the
pornography, etc.

If there is an impulse/urge to act out something sexual, to actualize something, then it just depends whether it’s good
to do that. The heuristic, here, too, is that if it’s safe and sufficiently not costly to do so then seek the
experience. If there are unsafe or costly elements then it can be better to work with the fantasy/desire/planning
experience as such rather than working to consummate it. There will be many good and redemptive things in there to
untangle, to get them separately from a sexual encounter, or you might come to find that wanting (and/or getting) the/an
inherently sexual thing is, partially or wholly, temporarily or stably, good to get and that you should work on creating
a context in which it’s safe and wholly good to get the thing or part of the thing mostly or partially just as it is.


on falling asleep:

Sometimes it’s good to use postures such as sitting without back support or standing, in order to avoid falling asleep
(see the posture section for more postures and thoughts on postures). But, it can be extremely profitable to meditate
while curled up comfortably in bed both while falling asleep for the night, right upon waking up (without even opening
one’s eyes), and also during the day. One can drift in and out of meditation, sleep, and reverie (sleep and reverie
could be conceived as falling under the surrender portion of p2 but don’t have to be.).

One could imagine that meditating in liminal states could lead to “bad form” or meditating incorrectly. But, I have
found this to not be the case, at least empirically. It seems to be the case that this protocol is specified both
precisely enough and generally enough that meditating and drifting (reverie) and sleeping seems to be extremely
valuable, especially when often, sometimes, or eventually mixed with meditation in other postures.


a gentle onramp:

Mark 8:55 AM 5-30 minutes of a prelim exercise, followed by 2-15 minutes of the meta protocol (retrospectively on those
5-30 minutes), 1-2 times per day, would be a gentle, powerful onramp. I would use the meta protocol to
semi-retrospectively determine which prelim exercises, how to personally enact them, for what duration, for how often,
would be good. It would be fine to go down them in order, or to make index cards, or to paste them into a spreadsheet
and keep track of frequency or duration in some way. Main practice p2 is sort of the heart of the main protocol, so
eventually one would want to start puzzling it out and easing into that, too, interleaving with prelim/aux practices and
the meta protocol. Eventually one will start acquiring better and better intuitions about what to do when, as well as
facility with navigating the document and dipping into it for ideas and refreshing on the text, to aid practice.

More questions welcome and please poke for different kinds/styles of answers if there’s something better

Mark 9:03 AM It’s not universally true, but, generally, “forcing,” “powering through,” or “needle-threading in order to
keep going and going” should be avoided because these can create puzzles that need to be laboriously undone later to
make further progress. If something seems like it’s “jamming” or “grinding,” I would halt that prelim/aux exercise and
engage the meta protocol to see if that illuminates a better thing to do. The meta protocol itself can jam, in which
case one can do lighter and lighter versions of the meta protocol (as described in the meta protocol section), or do the
“meta meta protocol” (apply the meta protocol to itself), or browse through the document and choose something else to
do, as per intuition (such as other prelim/aux practices or one of the main practices), or take a break and do something
different and/or fun. (edited)

Mark 9:12 AM For intuitions, to my mind, meditation is less like strength training and more like a single [many-typed,
many-peg] Tower of Hanoi-type puzzle, if that makes sense. Long-range, global [maximum] wayfinding through a
multidimensional, nonmonotonic space. (edited)

And the [open set of] prelim/aux practices reveal new dimensions of movement and new feedback loops, to be fed into the
global wayfinding engine [automatically and by application of the meta protocol]. (edited) And then p2 is the enactment
of global wayfinding which includes upgrading itself en route, interleaving handoffs to other practices for indirect
upgrades, and finally undoing and self-transcending itself.

Mark 9:33 AM Not universally, but generally, increases in muscle tension (including subtle, slow-growing) and
contortions of face and posture mean it’s important to cut over to or at least interleave the meta protocol. An
“uncoiled” posture such as sitting without back support, or standing, can make it easier to detect increases in muscle
tension (though reclining and supported postures should be used, too, for decreasing incidental factors).

Shaking, twitching, emoting, vocalizations, and large movements are sometimes necessary and sometimes “self-distraction”
(and sometimes a mixture). The meta protocol can be engaged to sort though and piece apart what should be allowed and
encouraged and what should gently be disengaged or blocked.


good(ness) bad(ness):

What is goodness? What is badness? What is good? What is bad? What is good for you? What is bad for you? What does
“good” mean to you? What does “bad” mean to you? Morally good, ethically good, personally good, good feeling? For you?
For others? Morally bad, ethically bad, bad feeling? For you? For others? Usefulness? Value? Worth? Worthiness?
Helpfulness? Spiritually? Practically? Partially good? Partially bad? Generally/contextually good?
Generally/contextually bad? Universally good? Universally bad? Wholly good? Wholly bad? Mixed good and bad? More good?
Less good? More bad? Less bad? Better? Worse? Best? Worst? [why not in meta, p/a, main practices and instead in lists
and more is left as exercise to reader. Cam of course play with in relation to any of p/a, main practices (including p1)
meta, and so forth.] doing good vs being good vs having good vs experiencing good. Doing bad vs being bad vs having bad
vs experiencing bad(ness). Intrinsic/essential/inherent goodness vs extrinsic/secondary/acquired/contextual goodness.
Intrinsic/essential/inherent badness vs extrinsic/secondary/acquired/contextual badness. Goodness of form. Goodness of
mode. Badness of form. Badness of mode. Goodness as an attribute. Badness as an attribute. Subsistent goodness.
Subsistent badness. Where and what and how and when and why and for what purpose is goodness? Where and what and how amd
why and when and for what purpose is badness? What causes goodness? What causes badness? When is goodness an effect?
When is badness an effect? When are goodness and badness neither a cause nor an effect? Is felt goodness always good? Is
felt badness always bad? Immediate goodness. Mediate goodness. Immediate badness. Mediate badness. Direct goodness.
Indirect goodness. Direct badness. Indirect badness. Sometimes good. Sometimes bad. Acting good. Acting bad. Appearing
good. Appearing bad. Somehow good. Somehow bad. Artificially good. Artificially bad. Naturally good. Naturally bad.
Stably good. Stably bad. Tending (toward) good. Tending (toward) bad. Historically good. Historically bad. Historically
mixed. Eventually good. Eventually bad. Highest good. Lowest good. Highest bad. Lowest bad. Initial good. Initial bad.
Final good. Final bad. Good for X. Bad for X. Good for X for Y. Bad for X for Y. Structurally good. Structurally bad.
Independently good. Independently bad. Dependently good. Dependently bad. Separably good. Separably bad. Inseparably
good. Inseparably bad. veridically good/bad, certainly good/bad, illusorily good/bad, apparently good/bad, good
before/after/at/when/during/while X, bad before/after/at/when/during/while X, good now/later, bad now/later, lower good,
higher good, net good, net bad, “too good,” “too bad,” “infinitely” good, “infinitely” bad, permanently good,
permanently bad, contagiously good, contagiously bad


some “big” useful concepts:

exceptionlessness universality timelessness eternality sempiternality true-everywhereness true-all-timesness
true-timelessly true-eternally true-sempiternally existing/obtaining-at-all-times existing/obtaining-timelessly
existing/obtaining-eternally existing/obtaining-sempiternally existing/obtaining-outside-of-time perfection flawlessness
unity wholeness wholeheartedness world universe experience everything totality globality reality actuality


poem of self/other confusion and interdependence:

Is this me? Is this you? Is that me? Is that you? I am you, and you are me, and we are we. No. This is almost me,
similar to me, but it is not me. That is almost me, similar to me, but it is not me. While plausibly me, this was
historically never actually me. While plausibly me, that was historically never actually me. I am not you, and you are
not me, and we are not we. I am me, and you are you. She is not him, and she is not you, and he is not her, and he is
not you. I am not him, and I am not her. I am me, and you are you, and I am not you, and you are not me. And, we can be
we.


states: (draft)

Normal waking ommiarousal; questing emotions Rest/digest laze around low vigilance low arousal Sexual arousal; (horny,
full plateau arousal, orgasm; post orgasm extended afterglow Compassion/care/love/teach/help/protect/serve/defend
arousal Syntonic stress arousal—perform, flow; achieve Dystopia stress arousal (or vasocagal response)—fight flight/flee
freeze faint Positive and negative past/future:counterfactual updating/processing emotions (surprise fear happiness
Epistemic pre and post processing emotions cf uncertainty—anxiety, unrest Puttering emotions—low arousal good—joy...
enjoyment, wellbeing Derealozation/depersonalization (can be acute with dystonic or chronic) States can be mixed


invitation of acceptance: (so-called “Litany of Gendlin”)

What is true is already so. Owning up to it doesn't make it worse. Not being open about it doesn't make it go away. And
because it's true, it is what is there to be interacted with. Anything untrue isn't there to be lived. People can stand
what is true, for they are already enduring it.

—Eugene Gendlin


nutrition:

I am not a doctor or other kind of licensed health professional, and this is not medical or nutritional advice.

If you are lacking mental or physical stamina for meditation, you might try adding butter and/or MCT oil to your diet.
(Some MCT oils have three different lengths and some just have two lengths. Sometimes just two lengths is advertised as
“better” in some way, but I felt like I was getting some kind of weird metabolic deficiency on the two lengths variety.
That last longer length chain seemed to really be good to have in there, for some reason, at least prior to adaptation,
which I didn’t try to do.) Less likely to be helpful, but depends, you might try adding a bit more cheese or other
animal saturated fat to your diet. (Each will have different chain length profiles.) You might also try adding a bit of
choline, which can take a few weeks to month for you to notice any difference.

If you’re not, consider jogging or other aerobic exercise to you life, 2-5 times per week for 40 minutes, minimum, to
avoid fat metabolism disfunction. You maybe should probably get your cholesterol checked periodically, too.

You might also consider adding non-rancid flax seed, some good source of sulfer, and/or some quality source of collagen.

You might also switch to all slow-release carbs, to even out insulin. The steadier energy release is, the less you’ll
have boom and bust mental energy before and after meals. You want super-steady energy release for hours and hours. If
you have insulin resistance, your body will release fuel from storage too slowly, and you’ll have to rely more on
proximity to meals for meditation enablement.

If you have insulin smoothed out, your food craving system will be smarter, and you should generally indulge food
cravings for weird food, as best you can.

If you’re eating fewer, larger meals, be careful with your kidney’s and liver.

Consider a multivitamin in powder form or in many pills per day, so you can titrate. I know multivitamins are supposed
to do nothing or be detrimental, but you might find subdoses to be seemingly very helpful.


historical and contemporary difficulties and uncertainties of life: [experimental section]

Warning: This section is experimental and should be approached with caution if you have live
existential/cosmological/eschatological/metaphysical issues or live mania, paranoia, or possibly other things.

In no particular order: deaths of parents, significant others, children, other family, natural disaster, solar flares,
pandemics, war, invasion, food insecurity, authoritarian surveillance states, violent feuds, systemically messed up and
flawed healthcare, accidents, nuclear war, phishing, failure of cryogenic preservation if you go that route or being
tortured and unable to die when you wake up until some very large energy source runs out, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s,
chronic fatigue, physical disability, nation/state/country failure, sudden death, cancer, stroke, agents of power
knowing exactly who you are and the uncertain threat of them coming to harm, kill, or take you away (in front of
significant others, children, or other family of friends).


muscle tension scratch:

Increases in muscle tension are caused when one is meditating under the conditions of needing/expecting a/any “some
particular thing” to be a/any “some particular way” on a/any “some particular timeline.” LaTeX subscript: ({“some
particular X”}_{de dicto})


last gasps:

One is sort of making it safe to re-experience things, as part of how meditation works—eventually a re-experiencing is
sort of the “final burning off of the (conditioning of the) thing.” So often a person will re-experience at least a
shadow of old, bad things, over and over again, until not again—things that they thought were long resolved, in the
course of a great deal of meditation. (One trap is thinking that one is not making progress, because this thing has come
up more than one time. It is progress! That’s just how the mind works.)

But there’s another thing that’s more problematic: If a person was crushing down a bunch of stuff, let’s say they then
stop crushing. But say they haven’t fully worked through the thing(s) under the crushing. If something happens in the
world to trigger them, around those now uncrushed things, like they see their old girlfriend or whatever, they might
have a more extreme, more impulsive, more destructive reaction, in that particular case, than if they hadn’t ever
meditated:

Behavior, belief or the very seeming of the world, and its attendant justification, will become live again, seem like
the right thing to think/see/do.

And then they’ll/you’ll be in old destructive patterns, transiently, as bad or even worse than when those initial
patterns were getting laid down. And then it’s maybe doubly regretful because this “last gasp” can go by fast. It can be
embarrassing, especially if one is a self-styled advanced meditator. And if only you’d gotten to that old stuff,
metabolized it, before being triggered. One just has to be as careful and meta-careful and meta-meta-careful and
responsible with and around other people as one can be, and to make amends and reparations, if warranted, in a way that
actually delivers, that takes into account all this. Not your fault, yet no excuse, all at once; it’ll be ok, but you
can’t morally rely on that, etc.


being (not) ok tangles:

If I’m ok, I won’t be able to connect with the people who are not ok, and lots of people are not ok, and I need to be
able to connect with them. So, I don’t want to be actually ok.

If I become ok I’ll lose everything that makes me actually good and me. Not being ok makes me safe, compassionate,
empathetic, and sensitive. I like being those things, and I can only be those things if I’m not ok.

People won’t see who I am if I’m actually ok (because actually ok isn’t who I actually am), and it’s critically
important that people see who I actually am.

I can’t actually be ok because then no one will love me. People will only leave people who aren’t completely ok, because
such people are safer, more compassionate, more empathetic, more reflective. Only people who aren’t ok can actually know
each other. Only people who aren’t ok can take care of each other. I can only be taken care of, when I need it, if I’m
not ok all of the time.

I’ll be struck down if I’m actually ok. Being actually ok isn’t safe. Being actually ok makes one a target.

If I’m actually ok, I will have to do things that I don’t want to do, that I’m ideologically and constitutionally
against doing. I don’t know any other way of not doing and not having to do those things than not being ok.

Being ok is against my belief system/ideology. Being not ok is what makes people good. Being not ok is what makes people
transcendent. Being not ok is an act of transgressive power.

Furthermore, it’s not ok to bask in the goodness of not being ok. Given that I’m not ok, it’s also not ok to fully enjoy
not being ok. It’s not ok to enjoy how being broken is incredibly delicious.


dark phenomenology and presence/absence conceptions:

Something to keep in mind is that some phenomenology is relatively more prone to being “misinterpreted” or
“misconceptualized,” still not committing to any particular thing when using the words “phenomenology,”
“mistinterpretation,” “misconceptualization,” etc.

In particular, phenomenology that is “dim,” “dark,” “black”(!), is not just harder to “see” than
gross/overt/bright/clear/something phenomenology or even subtle/low-intensity/low-magnitude that’s not “black.” It’s,
again, more prone to being misinterpreted/misconceptualized.

“Very dark” or “black” phenomenology sometimes contributes to people, in part, locally, isolatedly, in some part of
their “system,” “believing” that they’re nothing, or that they’re dead, or that nothing’s there, or the phenomenology
itself is nothing, or there’s a black hole “there” that one might get sucked into, and so on.

It might be worth noting that “black” phenomenology is still phenomenology! It’s still present!

As a caveat, this doesn’t mean all “black” phenomenology is “safe” or “harmless” or “the same” as all other “black
phenomenology.” I mean, it’s definitely safe in some absolute sense, but don’t interact with it mechanically or
unresponsively, as per usual! Possibly engage in things like the meta protocol in inclining towards what to do! There’s
still a sense in which bad/“bad” things could be lurking/hiding in “the black,” in “the dark” (or in bright stuff, too),
depending on all sorts of factors.

Again, please don’t “fix”/“stabilize” the meaning of pretty much any word in this section (or in the entire document),
but there’s a thing, here.

Additionally, given some relationship between quality and conception, there’s a related thing with conceiving presence
and absence.

For example, it’s important to distinguish between (a) not X, (b) the absence/lack of X, (c) the presence of the
representation of the absence/lack of X, and so on. Making a light, local distinction between something like
“experience” and something like “concept.” Conceptualization or experience of the lack of X, which, in some sense,
technically, is presence, not absence, may be accompanied by dim, dark, or black phenomenology. (Again, not all dim,
dark, or black phenomenology is “the same.”)

Example:

lack of belief and/or lack of disbelief is not the same thing as “active/present” disbelief, which might be some
combination of feelings, thoughts, “phenomenology,” sensations, etc. And some of that might be very dim, dark, or
“black.”


getting triggered, usefulness and risks:

Sometimes getting triggered can save time, whether that triggering is accidental, surprising, or even prospectively (and
retrospectively) net undesirable.

Somehow, someway, the meditator will make it all the states/places in their bodymind state that they need to or want to,
to have things change in ways that are nonmonotonically, retrospectively good. One doesn’t need an external trigger, in
the limit, which is good because sometimes triggers aren’t available, e.g. a childhood context or friend or enemy who’s
passed away or unavailable. (Often, though, too, something far removed from an original context has an element of, or
enough of a similarity, to an original context/person/situation, to serve as a trigger or cause triggering.)

But, if triggers are available, sometimes they can cause really fast pinpointing and learning, if the meditator is
ready. Sometimes, this will alleviate a bottleneck, and it’ll be doubly useful. Even if they’re not ready, it’s still
data that will be useful later.

Whether intentional or accidental, getting triggered isn’t always safe, because being triggered can sometimes involve an
increased propensity for destructive behavior. (Part of being triggered is sometimes not realizing one has been
triggered, and then destructive things sometimes feel “right” or “justified,” in the moment.

Being mindful of safety, sometimes it’s better to avoid being triggered, and sometimes it can be net-helpful to be
triggered. And sometimes undesirable triggering can happen, and it can be useful, even if it’s partially or
net-problematic.

Finally, “retraumatization” is a thing—being exposed to “triggers” too early can also cause net more “layering” and
“compensation” and thereby make things take fractionally longer, on net. This can be discouraging if one didn’t intend
to be triggered, but it’s normal to get triggered and retriggered, and it’s very possible to think one os being
“re-traumatized,” etc., but it’s actually net “redo-to-undo,” and net progress. It can be hard to tell in the moment,
and, in any case, getting triggered is par for the course, grist for the mill. It’s ok.

All that said, it can be fine good to systematically, actively seek out some triggers, some of the time, when you’re
ready or as a careful (or accidental) experiment.


informal working definitions:

trigger ~= something that can or does cause an abrupt (negative) state change, or change to local, behavioral
propensities, that doesn’t depend on the rest of the environmental context

trauma ~= bodymind state/feeling/content/material that’s needs extra steps to be safe to re-experience, that in its
dormant/latent state is a bottleneck/dependency on other/further valued changes


a dialogue between N and Mark, on reasoning and pre-reasoning:

[> indicates a pull-quote]

[we use the example of “feet” a lot, but that’s just one example! we might have used hands, belly button, something.
feet are a good heuristic thing to try, but it’s not a rule.]


N […] I guess the next logical question would be […]


Mark Want to say something like I think there’s a pre-rational step that’s being missed


N Say more!

Wdym by pre-rational?


Mark You probably should pay attention to your feet a bunch or something versus trying to answer questions like […]

maybe.

but something vaguely like that, maybe extensively


N You think there's a frozen thing in the body that constrains reasoning and needs to be moved around a bit by correct
placing of attention?


Mark YES. but, a lot, not a little bit


N Why won't reasoning work? The right answers simply won't pop up in my head or something?


Mark reasoning for most people mostly happens in a “virtual machine” and there’s only a trickle from that down to
preference changes, behavior changes, and goal changes, even if one comes up with “right answers.” a failure mode is to
keep collecting right answers indefinitely without them becoming a part of the “motivated seeming” of the world


N In my mind reasoning isn't disconnected from behavioral change, ala critical rationalism

IME in any case where I see lack of progress, I can sort of clearly see why and what problems aren't solved yet

I've never been in a situation where my problem seems explicitly solved, but no behavioral change follows


Mark That is true for some people, for some domains, contingently

> In my mind reasoning isn’t disconnected from behavioral change, ala critical rationalism

do you mean all minds or just some minds, like your mind?


N The latter, but I'd assume that they're reasoning incorrectly, i.e. missing important signals from the body or getting
themselves in conceptual tangles without noticing


Mark yeah


N So maybe I got lucky with my mind, hehe

Or I'm just deluded


Mark but incorrectly is a massive gradient, from extreme virtual machine to radical integration. almost everyone has a
lot of confusions, at least at first


N Do you have any reasons to believe that certain mental moves, e.g. look at feet, just plain don't work and are based
on spurious data?


Mark for some people doing that specifically will be the wrong thing to do at any given time. right thing right time in
right order

that’s why there’s 500+ p/a practices, etc., etc.


N Or, have you considered it?


Mark considered what?


N That they don't actually work


Mark the meta-protocol is a schematization of error checking and meta error checking. it’s an ongoing consideration of
whether such things don’t work

at any particular time for some particular person


N I see, I see

But you don't have an explicit model that accounts both for the usually psychotherapy stuff and mental moves such as
that, and can legibly translate from its language into their?

Or do you


Mark sensory experiences sculpt the future propensities of the system. talk therapy is narrow sculpting that leaves out
a huge range of possible experiences that can be used for sculpting

the mind is highly intertwingled such that feet are involved in reasoning, usually confusedly. gotta sometimes e.g. pay
attention to the feet to use e.g. talk therapy, correctly


N […] how/why sensory experience of one's feet can be useful for sculpting one's higher-level behavior and goals and
shit?

I understand the general idea

But I don't understand how experiencing one's feet could be useful for changing beliefs about the world

Feeling one's feet is very different from trying out new food and liking it, me thinks

In this sense feet seem irrelevant

To any major stuff

Don't understand how feet are involved with reasoning :(

Or can be

The way you talk about it is very different from the language/ontology I personally use to make sense of this area


Mark one’s epistemic stack involves sensory experience of elbows, knees, voice tone, prosody, everything. all of it
becomes the substrate for reasoning


Mark to improve reasoning one sometimes needs to unpack some of the lower-level stuff that doesn’t feel “meaning-laden,”
like weird body sensations


N So suppose a person feels their feet

And suppose she did it at the right time

What happens next?

An insight suddenly pops up in their head?

Or maybe weird sensations appear in some body part


Mark they realize they were doing reasoning wrong, somehow, that was systematically biasing their conclusions. it’s
usually not that direct but sometimes it is

usually it’s lots of small steps

that don’t seem to add up until the end


N And when it's not direct, what happens is something like 'next time they do think, they're able to look at the problem
from a slightly different perspective or something'?


Mark that’s object-level, and that’s a thing too. but, meta-level, the reasoning system itself will work slightly
differently, sometimes a bit worse before it’s long-run net better


N Aight

And they could also maybe never experience anything meaning-laden throughout feeling their feet?


Mark yeah, plenty of stuff stays non-meaning-laden, contentless [throughout]


N But they find out that reasoning works a lil better (or worse) when they try it next time?


Mark yup


N Ohh

Fuck, these inferences are, indeed, hard to make


Mark yes


N Like unless the person is systematic, they might never notice the connection

Right?


Mark even if reasoning works a little better, that doesn’t mean a conclusion is guaranteed to pop out in any particular
thinking/feeling session, ofc


N Yeah


Mark > Like unless the person is systematic, they might never notice the connection

yes exactly


N You really need to put this into protocol


Mark it’s ridiculously long-range/counterintuitive, all things being equal


N It connects the right stuff

For me and probably certain people


N Could it be that some people simply notice stuff like 'when I work out or do open awareness, I sort of can think
better afterwards', and the model above explains why?


Mark yeah

could you see if this existing section kind of says it:

“headyness”/“heady-ness”/“headiness”


N I've read it, I think

And it didn't


Mark ok


N How does one start noticing patterns such as this? (e.g. look at feet now, see more progress later)


Mark I think need to study a ton of people from the outside, or need a methodological bootstrap, from the inside.


N How could studying people work?


Mark the methodological bootstrap, for me, was p2 plus the meta protocol.


N Like, it's so hard to notice it in yourself


Mark wayfinding in methodology/theory space


N How would it be easier to notice in others?


[delay]


Mark i’m looking for the original Gendlin Focusing research study

N Go on

Oh


Mark they tried to figure out why some people made progress in therapy and others didn’t, and that’s how they isolated
“focusing moves”


N It has something about that

Yeah

I know

Doesn't seem like something that's possible for a regular Joe to do


Mark and so my stuff, for example, could be considered a generalization of that original observation


N Aight

What do you think determines the amount of time one needs to look at their feet? Like, why a lot or a little in certain
cases?


Mark > Doesn’t seem like something that’s possible for a regular Joe to do

it is very freaky when it feels like “me or someone maybe couldn’t have figured out this important thing without outside
stimulus”

very unpleasant, at first, at least for me


N Does anything else matter, aside from looking when feel stuck?


Mark > What do you think determines the amount of time one needs to look at their feet? Like, why a lot or a little in
certain cases?

has to do with deep contingent structure of any particular system based on experiences that person has had and prior
attentional propensities


Mark hard to explicate which is why personal global wayfinding can help


N Wanna unpack 'prior attentional propensities'?


Mark including possibly reads by people who are a bit farther on the journey

the experiences we have determine the structure of the system and the future propensities of the system


N > What do you think determines the amount of time one needs to look at their feet? Like, why a lot or a little in
certain cases?

> Wanna try unpacking the gears behind 'deep contingent structure of...'?


Mark so the necessary order of refactoring of a system will depend on that causal history


N What do you think determines the amount of time one needs to look at their feet? Like, why a lot or a little in
certain cases?

Maybe with an example


Mark it’s really hard to say. if someone ignored their feet a lot or spent a lot of time attending to their feet, at
some point in their life. then, in meditation or whatever, they’ll probably need to spend a lot of time with their feet.

it’s like a collection of loosely coupled stacks, in the computer science sense. LIFO: last in first out, in terms of the order one needs to sort of touch stuff in to refactor  

loosely coupled partial orderings

N
So from a subjective experience viewpoint, what mostly happens is just you staring at feet and nothing really happens while you're doing it  

And you do it for a long time

Maybe regularly or at once


Mark kind of. one can keep running navigational stuff like meta protocol, but there can be a lot of up-front
uncertainty.

the “how” matters, too. things like top-down attending vs “letting feet come to you” and stuff like that. and might need
to interleave many other things. could extend timeline if just forcefully tried to attend to something in a contiguous
block. needs to be patient, gentle, curious, cautious, etc. etc.


N Is it a linear thing? I.e. the less you looked at feet before, the more you gotta do it? What happens behind the
scenes while you do it?


Mark but yeah, it can take a long time before one gets a sense of whether “something’s happening” or not. it’s a very
gradual increase in sensitivity and long-range wayfinding

i think it’s sublinear for any particular thing and superlinear globally

but still practically finite. a fraction of the time one has already been alive


N ^ don't understand sub/supra

Also would like to get an answer to 'what happens behind the scenes', if ok


Mark so like if feet stuff was weird for five years, then maybe only need 500 hours of feet stuff and not five years of
feet stuff

there’s a compression thing

but there’s still sort of a combinatorial explosion of pairwise e.g. feet interaction with other things.

lots of recursion

behind the scenes it’s like A comes into contact with B and yields A-prime and B-prime, and there’s like a huge number
of these little interactions that have to occur and reoccur


N What's ‘A-prime'?


Mark A-prime is A but a little different


N (prime, is that from maths?)

Ok


Mark yeah


N And A and B are beliefs or something?

Mark beliefs, anticipations, synaptic potentials, something


N Cool

And that happens unconsciously?

I assume


Mark one can infer it sometimes from skeletal muscle changes, tingles, insights, and other phenomenological changes, but
it can seem like nothing is happening sometimes for many hours


N If something bubbles up to consciousness, then in what form?

Cool


Mark
insights, realizations, muscle tension changes, yeah  


N You have a list in the end of all stuff that could be useful to look through

Mark yeah


N Is there a way you can dissect that list? E.g. hands/feet usually are more useful, so try maybe starting with those
first, but be gentle and self-aware etc etc


Mark i think i give some rough heuristics somewhere

in various lists and more sections


N Where?

Hm

Can't recall seeing that


Mark extremities and stomach, not the head, are good places to experiment with, first. but too much can tangle further,
etc,. etc.


N Aight


N Is there more info in those places in the protocol?


Mark > Is there more info in those places in the protocol?

i don’t do too much of this because it’s so personally contingent and blocky suggestions might cause people to ignore
subtle stuff that’s not in my suggestions


N Cool

Aight thanks

Oh

How can you notice that I need to e.g. look more at feet?

Is it something you infer from what I say and the types of problems I'm dealing with, for example?


Mark If something feels stuck, wrong, etc., but usually hope to e.g. look at feet long before that.


N Oh


Mark > Is it something you infer from what I say and the types of problems I’m dealing with, for example?

usually not object level problems, though sometimes, but general patterns, yeah


N So in my case I don't feel like I'm completely stuck, more like 'it's moving too slow'. But I don't feel that I
literally tried all I can and that my current way of dealing w stuff can't give me more progress atm

Is that why

You say that I should continue with what I do

And maybe eventually naturally exhaust the potential

Of what I'm doing?


Mark Maybe!! But can be good to keep alternatives in mind, too, and maybe interleave a little bit, increasingly over
time


N But if I interleave, I won't be able to clearly notice that that's what's helping me

And I'll keep thinking that my method is working


Mark There may be ways to do it while not confounding too much. Not entirely overlapping lead indicators.

But it’s a good point


N Say more?

Re ways


Mark
you may notice different good things via your current way versus trying new things, making it possible to know where the good things are coming from  

there will be some overlap, probably, but not complete overlap


N Oh

Ok

Aight, cool

Thanks for doing this conversation!


Mark you’re very welcome. thank you for your questions




“psychic” and “supernatural” stuff: what/how/how-not: [draft]

This is a section about:

geas, spells, curses, evil eye, demons, objects, entities, ghosts, echoes, spirits, critters, egregores, aliens,
servitors, siddhis, powers, ESP, psi, mediumship, shamanism, energy work, energy healing, prana, qi, chi, ruach, qigong,
taichi, bodywork, reiki, intuitive healing, intuitive diagnosis, clairvoyance (clairaudience, clairsentience, etc.),
angels, higher beings, possession, lower beings, higher selves, magic, magick, occult, voodoo, spirit guides, imprints,
possession, riders, compulsion, bewitchment, ensorcellment, psychic rape, brainwashing, mesmerizism, animal magnetism

Most of the above could qualify as “supernatural,” and most of the above somehow relates to other people or other
“entities.” Also, the above list is a mix of traditions and even a mix of perhaps “good” and “bad,” though some
traditions think almost all of the above are bad, or at least distracting. With respect to “supernatural” phenomena,
different traditions may emphasis different distinctions:

Now versus later or never:

Contemporary meditation teachers sometimes mention “the powers”, “the siddhis” as illusory or real-but-orthogonal to
spiritual practice, either something to be ignored or avoided, or something to come back to, later, maybe: “If you meet
the buddha on the road, kill him.”

Sentient versus non-sentient:

Various occult and religious traditions distinguish between possession (e.g. by entities, ghosts, demons) and other
kinds of not-directly-sentient spiritual and interpersonal effects.

Self versus not-self:

Very loosely speaking, maybe, shamanism (I’m not sure if all of indigenous, pre-contemporary, and contemporary) makes a
distinction between “parts of the self” (e.g. “soul fragments”??) versus “curses,” “darts,” etc.

Contemporary, and relatively secular, Internal Family Systems therapy purportedly distinguishes between “guides” and
“critters.”

There are broad patterns or rules in all of these traditions for distinguishing between what’s what, what’s self and
not-self, as it were, what’s false and true, and what’s good and what’s bad, and when, out of all of these apparent
things. And these traditions have procedures and methods for what to do under various conditions.

***

I didn’t say this in the Culture section; but, here, I’ll straightforwardly assert that relatively high fidelity,
“things” can apparently be “in your mind” but “not you.”

(Is this a “pragmatic” claim or a “literal” claim? Yes, no, maybe, both, neither, etc.)

These sorts of “things,” “information,” “patterns,” “objects,” “influences,” including those with
“agency/will/intelligence” can, not always, but not unusually, be as apparently high fidelity as your own thoughts,
feelings, sensations. (Regarding “agency/will/intelligence,” this still includes simple, confused, and perseverative
things.) And, what’s “you” and “not you” can be easily confused for the other. Just like, sometimes, some “parts” of you
might feel like “I” and some “parts” of you might feel like “me” or “past me”, etc.,, also, sometimes, you may, too,
find what ultimately comes to be understood as “not me.” (And, of course, some people do sometimes say things like,
“This isn’t me. That’s not me.” More on this, below.)

(And, of course, not all of you, or necessarily any of you, feels “part like.” It’s not really accurate to say people
are “made of parts.”)

***

So, here we go. There are a bunch of nuanced points to be made, here, so do please read this section carefully and maybe
more than once.

It will be outrageous or disappointing to some people that a claim like “in you but not you” is being made in this
document, whether I handwave about “pragmatic” or “literal” claims, or not. It might help a little bit to note that, to
some indigenous cultures, say, a light touch of wind or dust sparkling in a shaft of sunlight, can be ascribed agency
and be conceived of as a literal spirit, erroneously or not, in some ontology and metaphysics. Suffice it to say, here,
mechanism is a bit outside the scope of this section (and document), but phenomenology, usefulness, and reflective and
prereflective conceptualizations-as-such, though, are in scope.

So, this section is not about “how could this even be a thing, literally or apparently?” It’s not about neurophysiology,
information theory, signal processing, bandwidth, inverse problems, biophysics, sociology, superstition, cognitive
biases, nocebo effects, confirmation bias, autosuggestion, confabulation, demand effects, cultural conditioning,
religious conditioning, etc.

With that in mind, I want to acknowedge that, if you at least provisionally accept that “there is an existant, relevant
phenomenon, here” you may immediately and prereflectively have opinions and reflexive inclinations for what to *do*
about all this, and you might immediately start doing those things, right now or upon encountering what I might be
referring to. You might be tempted to go right to treating these phenomena as superstition, culture, or sociology, and
you might prefer to preemptively treat such phenomena as, say, biology, neuroscience, or physics, or at least “somehow
natural.”

(“Somehow-natural” seems good; I, personally, more or less, believe that everything is lawful, natural, etc., and sort
of can’t be otherwise, almost be definition, or something. And, I’m a fan of contemporary (and especially future…)
physics and neuroscience. Say, forces, fields and nothing else, maybe.)

Anyway, the point I want to make is that some of what you do will be local and net error *correction*, but some things
will be local and net error *propagation*:

It’s very important to do some form of overall process error checking, like with the Meta Protocol or something in the
same spirit.

So, my advice then would be to go in without preconceptions, as best you can, in part because meditation is eventually
going to “turn everything inside out,” anyway. And, if you take my advice, safely letting go of preconceptions, to
flexibly engage with these sorts of phenomena, is a process. Yes, say, physics, sociology, everything. But, also, maybe,
temporarily, set physics aside to pick it up again, later. In any case, you’re going to believe physics *differently* on
the far side, even though all the equations will be the same. Also, likely, much of you,“doesn’t believe in physics,”
*right now*. Childhood parts of you, as it were, will believe in god, monsters under the bed, etc. Additionally,
“things” inside of you can believe in gods and monsters and might not believe in *you.*

To be sure, sometimes, there’s a gray area between, say, “a self-introjected parent” versus, sometimes, alien-ness or
foreignness that is much more clear cut. But, you may eventually find that many things are much, much more clear cut
than you might initially expect. Most people have at least a little bit of this sort of “not me” phenomena and some
people have a lot.

As per the usual pattern, there can be a period of increasing confusion and problematic over-sensitization (which can
last a very long time and potentially be very crippling) followed by things getting properly situated, comprehended,
interpreted, filtered, and/or understood. This applies to both what’s “already in you,” as well as “new stuff that you
might pick up in real time.” One’s “real time filters” often get worse, before they get better, as per how the bodymind
sometimes needs to make changes.

Things get to make sense in the end, but they might not make sense in the middle, and over and over again.

More generally, for all this stuff, It can be good to have the goals of wellbeing (and safety), intellectual internal
consistency (phenomenology, science, sociology, compassion, kindness, love), and understanding, while being open to
suffering, inconsistency/contradiction, and confusion.

***

One might ask, why engage with this sort of thing at all, on any timeline? The answer is that “not-you” things, whether
neutral, malevolent, or benevolent, “real” or “illusory,” all things being equal, will typically, eventually, sooner or
later, become a bottleneck on meditative progress. There will typically be a way in which they are subtly “against the
grain” of one’s (body)mind and will eventually “get in the way.” There’s some sense in which they need to be
“metabolized” or “integrated.”

Given that claim, this is a good place to explore some concerns and objections:

(1a/3) The concern of buying into a “demon-haunted world”—(1b/3) where, e.g. only one method, one cult can save you.

The above is from the title of a Carl Sagan book: “The Demon-Haunted World: Science as a Candle in the Dark”

So, should you, in some sense, surely not in the Sagan sense, buy into a demon-haunted world? On what metaphysical,
physical, psychological, or even moral grounds? You’ve got just one body and one brain, right? Right??? When and how
does it make sense to treat things as “parts,” let alone “parts” that are “not you.” In what sense??? Via what causal
history??? Via what mechanism???

This is maybe where most meditation writers get cagey. I try to almost never, ever, ever do the cagey thing, but I’m
going to do it, here, at least in this version. Part of the issue is that one needs to sort of go beneath, underneath
“all” metaphysical, physical conceptions, anyway, in some sense, regardless of what’s “really” going on. You’ll need to
come to (provisional) conclusions for yourself, via engagement with your own process.

But, but, but, I want to reiterate a few things from the Culture section. There’s the pattern of another person or group
somehow causing you to experience something unexpected and then using that to somehow claim intellectual, moral, or
“health/safety” authority over you. Some cults out there will wait a bit, wait for you to get sucked in, before telling
you something like, “you are not just broken but also filled with bad things, and you have to get them out or disaster
or forever non-acceptance!” And whatever they tell people will be correlated *just enough* with that person’s experience
that that person will both believe the cult and also think that the cult is their only option to get “clean” or “pure”
or worthy of happiness, safety, intimacy, etc. It often works, at least in the West(?), because mainstream culture
mostly doesn’t talk about these sorts of apparent phenomena—so being somehow exposed to these sorts of phenomena is
immediately isolating and yet these people seem to know all about it, and they want to help… Yikes.

That being said, this document *is* intended for people who want to “go all the way,” towards something that has to be
reconceived during the journey. But, you don’t have to defer happiness, safety, intimacy while you’re doing it. It’s
always the best mix and ordering you can figure out, as you go. And, of course, just because you’re reading this doesn’t
mean you have to “do the document.” As written in a few places, this document is a telephone game, and I hope people
will take it apart and use it (or parts of it) on their own terms, on their own timeline. You don’t have to give up your
intellectual, moral, etc., autonomy. There are additional external resources below that talk about these sorts of
phenomena (some intended as “good” examples and some as “problematic” examples.)


(2/3) The concern of self-repression, self-suppression, self-alienation

So, again, it’s worth calling out, that any conceptualization of “in you but not you” can potentially lead to
“self-violence.” Recall, “in you but not you” is just words that you are actively interpreting. It might not mean what
you think it means. You might come to prefer very, very different language or a very different way of thinking about all
this. You might decide that the frame, here, is deeply contingent and generally inappropriate. It’s possible that I’m
very wrong about something.

Here, I can only refer one to the meta protocol and main practice p2, to careful discussions with other people, and
maybe engagement with additional resources. Be careful, patient, gentle and discerning, generally, as best you can.

A general point is that, even if you’re not sure whether something is “good” or “bad” (or “mixed”), whether or not
you’re sure whether it’s “you” or “not you,” at any point you can explore what’s good about it. You get to keep anything
that’s good, no matter where it came from or how it came to be under consideration.


(3/3) The concern/horror/distate of purportedly “needing to” “integrate”/“metabolize” “everything.”

So, we’re pretty far down in this section, and we sort of haven’t talked about the potential “horror” or all this, yet.
I didn’t want to coercively suggest that all of this can be very scary. That said, it can be, and sometimes it
transiently is, but, immediately or nonmonotonically, it can become very manageable and matter-of-fact.

Again, some people will barely encounter any of this, or won’t for a very long time, and other people will encounter a
bunch of it, up front, and/or it will even be pretty central for a while, maybe getting bad or worse, in a bunch of
different ways, before it gets better.

In any case, the main point of this subsection is to unpack these ideas of “integrate” or “metabolize” a little bit
more.

By “metabolize” or “integrate,” this doesn’t mean that you, in some sense have to either “keep” a bad or unwanted thing
or, again, that you have to “give up”/“dissolve” a good thing.

It’s more like, perhaps, you get to appreciate the goodness and badness of things, as you come to understand those
things better and better—until “influence” becomes mere “information” (as Ken Wilber might put it). I really like his
concision, here: “Influence becomes information.” (I think he was talking about the personal psychological shadow and
not “objects” but it still generally applies.)

So, if something is “metabolized,” it might be that all that’s left is a (nonreactive, nontraumatic) memory and/or the
knowledge and confidence for how to deal with such things in the future. It could be more than that, too—e.g. some “bad”
thing might be “brave,” and you might want to keep some aspect of that braveness around or, more likely, even just use
the inert memory of it as inspiration for your own braveness on your own terms. Or you might use something “bad” as
inspiration for how to be the opposite of that. As discussed above, you can keep anything you want to keep, in the way
you want to keep it, or it can just be the knowledge that something happened, likely “truly having made peace with
that,” on, say, truly your terms.

***

So, by “metabolization” or “integration” hopefully it’s clear that I mean something very methodologically specific
(through very flexible, in the concretes) and also very contingently personal.

So how does one do it? As with anything else, it’s “just” engagement with main practice p2, the other main practices,
auxilliary practices, as needed for inspiration, the meta protocol, your own interpretation of “how to do all this” that
changes and improves, over time. As said in a bunch of places, it sort of all becomes “just doing one thing,” simplicity
on the far side of complexity, whether you’re working with “me,” “not me,” or often both mixed together, etc. Hopefully,
this further discussion will make things faster and easier, though.

Doing something like “metabolization” or “integration” might be a very different conceptual/experiential/sensory,
multi-step puzzle per thing to be metabolized. (If it weren’t at least a little bit of a puzzle, it would have already
happened a long time ago, “automatically,” probably.)

(By the way, as per “puzzle-like nature,” just “willing” “Integrate!” or “Metabolize!” might seem useful or even
seemingly effective, in the short-term, but, likely, much will have to be re-done. Again, recall, error correction
versus error propagation.)

Do maybe remember that terms like “object,” “thing,” or even “ghost,” “angel,” “demon,” can be misleading, of course.
For you, your (body)mind, you might seemingly find those sorts of things in yourself as such, and/or/also, it might be
more like a pattern, a shimmer, sensory patterns, more wavelike than particle-like, or person-like, as it were. But, it
might indeed feel person-like. There can also be plenty of “disembodied” feelings, sentiments, urges/iimpulses,
reactiveness, “beliefs,” etc., that you ultimately come to understand as “not me,” before then making decisions about
what to do next.

Person-like, feeling-like (etc.), and pattern-like phenomena will likely need different interaction patterns, in the
puzzle-solving sense.

Sometimes things that feel like “not me” will turn out to be “was me all along,” disowned/repressed/suppressed parts of
self, sometimes, e.g., soft and/or loving (“good”) and sometimes, e.g., scared and/or violent (“bad”).

And so sometimes things that feel like “not me” will be “actually from the outside.” And there can be many subtypes of
each, all of which might be best treated in very different ways.

(And sometimes things that you thought were "me" turn out to be "not me" or often an ultimately separable mix of both
"me" and "not me.")

Each of these cases may take a bit of a different approach, and there might be many types/kinds/cases/mixes/subtypes of
each.

Regarding “me” versus “not me” (versus even an initially mixed situation), and regarding the process of determining
which is which, and what to do before or after provisionally determining that, here are the briefest of
examples/analogies: You probably wouldn’t treat a friend (happy or unhappy), or a seemingly suffering stranger,
necessarily, in a same way, though their might be deep guiding principles or values at any particular time. Sometimes
with a friend, you’d be very open to letting them guide, or sometimes you might be firm, or sometimes it would be very
undifferentiated. Sometimes with a stranger you might be particularly polite. Other times you might be particularly
cautious or you’d have firm boundaries for when and how to interact. Sometimes people mislead, misrepresent, outright
lie, or are mistaken about their own “true nature.” You might or might not, initially or finally, interact on their
terms or their frame. Or you might! And, of course, all of this might be quite nonverbal and very experiential (or,
again, very “low level” and not with reference to person-like-ness at all, etc.).

It might seem initially complicated, but, ultimately, you’ll sort of transcend any particular mechanistic or stereotyped
framework or set of steps!

You don’t need to memorize patterns, rules, etc.! You will bottom-up acquire them, implicitly or explicitly, in any
case. It can be helpful to write things down, sometimes, buckets, lists, reminders, messy or organized. It can be
helpful to try strategies in this document and to articulate/write your own variations in your own words. In any case,
there is a simplicity on the far side of complexity. Eventually, there’s a real sense that you’re “just doing one
thing,” whether something is person-like, pattern-like, you, not-you, good, bad, safe, unsafe, etc. Eventually you’ll
go/experiment/learn/succeed largely by “feel,” “beneath” language and even concept or category.

And, you’ll make mistakes! Sometimes you’ll find that something you’ve been treating as “you” or “not you” is actually
the other case, or it’s an initially mixed case that’s more complicated than you thought. Many people, most people, will
have inevitable error propagation mixed in with error correction. Try not to have this happen, but it will(!!!!), and
that’s ok. It’s ok to make mistakes, part of the 5,000-10,000 hours, or whatever, accounts for thousands of hours worth
of mistakes and backtracking!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! [sic]

Given the ways in which the mind is “lossless,” even “propagated” and “entrenched” errors can be undone, unentrenched.
Any “mistake” can be undone, whether from five minutes ago or back from within your prenatal first seconds of
consciousness. (Yes; that may need to be a whole other section, in a similar style to this section.) This is (very)
long-range wayfinding, and there will be wrong turns, and it’s ok.

***

There are maybe a few fairly general patterns that can pop up pretty often:

As per usual, there’s the general “making it safe to look and then looking.”

There maybe is also “making it safe for this to possibly have been me all along and then being able to check.”

There is also “making it safe to provisionally accept/allow the seeming felt goodness/attractiveness in this
bad/evil/horrifying/distasteful/disgusting thing and then basking in that savoring that, for the purpose of coming to
ultimately impartial conclusions.” As discussed in the culture section, even if lots of bad stuff came along with it,
“knowingly or unknowingly” (to some part of you), there will probably be something tempting, attractive, seemingly good,
in there, too, that will need to be evaluated. The bodymind is very conservative and doesn’t want to throw away possibly
good things, no matter how problematic the circumstances of encountering those good things! Preferentially, the mind
will “detoxify” rather than discard.

***

Nearing the conclusion, anyway, again, some people will barely encounter any of all of this, or won’t for a very long
time, and other people will encounter a bunch of it, up front, and/or it will even be pretty central for a while, maybe
getting bad or worse, in a bunch of different ways, before it gets better.

But, on the other side, things will be simpler, safer (for self and others), with better boundaries and better filters,
but not in a way that interferes with connection, intimacy, closeness.

And, you might find that you want to frame/conceptualize all of this in a very different way than the one I’m using,
here. And, my pedagogical or actual frame, position, etc., will change in various ways, too.

***

A final rant, in a bit of a different tone, from some previous scratch notes:

The hardcore meditator, as it were, uses everything, ontologically/metaphysically commits to nothing, and steadily cuts
straight to the heart of everything. Open mind—so as not to get stuck; meta protocols—so as to be able to navigate (or
to be able to choose when not to navigate) in the midst of anything and everything. One could spend a *lifetime*
researching or practicing occult things, or, in my opinion, spend “only”/*only* 4000-15,000 hours meditating (which is
also an epistemological practice) thereby retrospectively and counterfactually obviating the benefits of any such occult
practice and study, in my current opinion. I mean, it’s ok to poke around a bit, of course, as per interest, but it’s
kind of bottomless unless one finds a way to credibly get the whole shape of it, likely from the outside (e.g. by
meditating, at the very least).

As per the Culture section of the document, most of time, maybe almost all of the time, 99% of the time, it may be good
to avoid spending really any time at all with anyone who claims special, deep, or correct knowledge about any of
spiritual/occult/etc things, especially if divorced from straightforward, no-frills transformative practice.

(For that 1% of friends, peers, collaborators, teachers, mentors, it might be very useful or helpful to carefully
engage, though. Recall, also, the Many Protocol, which is intended to harmonize with, complement and/or replace this
entire space. Some percentage of meditators will go on to become nondogmatic healers, bodyworkers, shamans, etc. It
might be good to do no more than dabble in those things until one is many thousands of hours into their meditation
practice (4000 hours, 5000 hours, 10,000 hours, even). This whole space should maybe boil down into something elegant,
simple, and error-checked, for you, and relatively personally and interpersonally safe, first.)

(And don’t become a “dark wizard.” This will be tonally abrupt and harsh, using language that’s unlike any other in the
document, but one could replace “dark wizard” with “predator” or “mind rapist.” That noted, it’s ok to have coercive
intimacy, sex, power fantasies! But also be mindful that, sometimes in very literal ways, such fantasies don’t live only
in your head, and it’s important to keep that in mind, long-run. There’s, in some sense, nothing wrong with non-fantasy,
actual “power,” too, decontextualized. It’s neutral, in some sense. But, as far as I can tell, the only power that works
in the long-run is power that is systematically contrite/repentant, systematically nonviolent, and that which safely,
systematically empowers others, among other things.)

And, do maybe read the Culture section for more thoughts on ascribing blame, intention, intent, etc., if you experience
these sorts of things, in or via your immediate or past environments. It’s tricky stuff, and sometimes people are “doing
things” well outside of their awareness or reflective intent. And sometimes you’re the only one affected, or you’re the
catalyst, or it was “only in your own head all along,” or everyone bears some “responsbility”/responsibility, or a
particular thing is good for some people and bad for others. And, other times, someone really especially did some sort
of especially focused thing (occult, meditative), in the past, reflecitvely or not, which contributed to them doing
something predatorial or coercive now (and they might be, at least initially, belligerently defensive, or horrified, or
not). And you might find that that (partly) coercive person is actually you, or both of you, or some third party.


***

Further reading:

[Note that some of these I particularly don’t endorse or have very mixed feelings about. And some are provided purely
for context.]

[Thank you to everyone who suggested some of these resources to me.]

Katz, Richard. Boiling energy: Community healing among the Kalahari Kung. harvard university Press, 1982.

Stephan, V. Singing to the plants: A guide to mestizo shamanism in the upper Amazon. UNM Press, 2010.

Earley, Jay. Self-Therapy: A Step-By-Step Guide to Creating Inner Wholeness Using Ifs, a New, Cutting-Edge Therapy.
Hillcrest Publishing Group, 2009.

Allione, Tsultrim. Feeding your demons: Ancient wisdom for resolving inner conflict. Little, Brown Spark, 2008.

Fortune, Dion. Psychic self-defense. Weiser Books, 1967.

Mariani, Mike. American Exorcism.
https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2018/12/catholic-exorcisms-on-the-rise/573943/ Last accessed: 2020-05-08

Malaea, Marika. Catholic Church Attendance in Decline While Exorcisms and Exorcism Training is on the Rise.
https://www.newsweek.com/catholic-church-attendance-decline-while-exorcisms-exorcism-training-rise-1469334 Last
accessed: 2020-05-08

https://news.vcu.edu/article/The_centuriesold_practice_of_exorcism_is_on_the_rise_Why_now Last accessed: 2020-05-08

http://betsybergstrom.com/about/depossession.php ; https://www.google.com/search?q=compassionate+depossession ;
https://www.google.com/search?q=betsy+bergstrom+compassionate+depossession

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neoshamanism

Scott, Derek. https://www.derekscott.co/2012/06/the-integration-of-spiritual-experiences/ Last accessed: 2020-05-08

“Why I No Longer Practice IFS Therapy” https://www.nadinemenezes.com/ifs-therapy Last accessed: 2020-05-08

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_cognition



self and other; good and bad:

[please read the section, “psychic” and “supernatural” stuff: what/how/how-not, before this section]

***

[The first draft of this, below, came out extremely “stilted!” The first few sentences and paragraphs are especially
bad, particularly rough going, and it gets at least a little bit better, as you continue on.]

***

One could imagine a person having a “deepest” or “bare metal” or “enacted” understanding of things like individuation,
individuality, identity, personhood, will, agency, autonomy, etc..

These (a) “deep understandings” of individuation, etc. might or might not well-correspond to, sort of, (b) *intellectual
concepts* of individuation, etc.. So, we might talk about individuation, etc. while not “inappropriately
reifying/fixatinging/relying” on any particular intellectual (or lived/felt) understandings of individuation, etc..

Additionally, we might talk about a “confusion gradient,” about these sorts of things, from worse to better, again while
also not inappropriately reifying/fixatinging/relying on something like that.

Less abstractly, one might imagine that, deep down, maybe in a few different sorts of ways, a person might not be able
to tell “who’s who,” or “who’s doing what,” or even that there are multiple people instead of just a seeming
“undifferentiated one thing.” One might be able to imagine this or also, now (or eventually, in meditation) find their
own “actually instantiated, personally resonant” things like this. Almost everyone has a scattered little bit of things
like this, and some people have a lot.

(About all this stuff, one might ask, well, if there’s *confused,* then what might relatively *un-confused* look like?
And, what about spiritual teachings around perhaps-related things like seamlessness, undifferentiatedness,
interconnectedness, no-self, etc.? One might note that “apparently very enlightened” people still have “coherently
differentiated” behavior, at least in some sense—that is, they can keep track of who knows what, when a new person
enters a multi-person conversation; they can remember and use people’s names; open a checking account; drive a car,
whatever. So one might imagine potentially ever-more-appropriate, all things being equal, lived synthesis of
interconnectedness and differentiation, perhaps at a profoundly deep level.)

Continuing on, recalling from previous sections, that people can and do, for better and worse, end up with “patternness”
of other people “in” them, and, allowing that confusions around identity, individuation, personhood, etc., can be
“patterns” in this sense, confusions around individuation and identity tends be more “contagious” than other “kinds” of
“patterns,” all things being equal. That is, people can catch identity-and-individuation confusions, from each other,
sometimes, and this is a bit more likely than catching other sorts of things.

One might see how this might be the case. Almost everyone has a little bit of identity-and-individuation confusion. And
to any degree that “the medium is the message,” and to any degree that identity-and-individuation confusion in one
person might unilaterally or reciprocally exacerbate identity or individuation confusion in another person (even if “a
little different,” somehow), then one might see how identity-and-individuation confusion, in one or two (or more)
people, might unilaterally or reciprocally be contagious or aggregative. (This is not a great or clear argument, but I’m
going ot keep going.)

In fact, one might further hypothesize that all (or most, or lots of) cases of “stuff transfer,” between people, might
depend on or be enabled by, at root, identity-and-individuation confusions of one or both people. (And, as mentioned in
other places, all of this can be accidental, deliberate, reflective, unreflective, endorsed, disendorsed,
quasi-unilateral, mutual, etc.)

Further, one might imagine *cascades* of *worsening* identity-and-individuation confusions as well as “more object
level” content, “beliefs,” “goals,” “plans,” “cosmology,” etc., kind of layered-ly building on each other. And, even if
very fractionally, the more “relatively similar” two (or more) people became, the easier it would be for object- and
meta-level confusions to ramify, and things could potentially get worse and worse, until some sort of equilibrium, if
ever. (And, again, we don’t want to inappropriately reify “things” like beliefs, goals, plans, etc.)

An important principle in the above is that if one person has, some “belief” *A*, and another person has very similar
“belief” *A-prime*, those “beliefs” are more likely to get mixed together [“A-double-prime”] in one or both people,
perhaps in different ways, because it won’t be perfectly symmetric. And this can happen for lots and lots of “beliefs,”
etc., and, as above, this can facilitate even more mixture, etc.

And, ultimately, in a bad case, a person might end up having aggregated large “swaths” of “pattern” very far from their
original beliefs or even very contradictory to lots of their beliefs, sometimes leading to muscle tension, emotional and
behavioral disregulation, demotivation, “goal fragmentation,” etc. (being careful, here, not to inapproriately reify
things like “goal fragmentation,” etc.).

That said(!), one might imagine this mixing to sometimes be relatively harmless or even a useful mechanism of group
cohesion. (I can imagine it being contingently harmless and useful, sometimes.) But, at least some of the time, as per
an earlier section, because this process is sort of “messy,” and “confusion-based” (as claimed, here), any mixing will,
over time, potentially create tangles and technical debt, as it were, for someone. So, while it might short-run be
unnoticeable or positive, over time it can tend to gum up, jam up, limit positive and self-valued individual and group
change, causing personal transformative arrest and group transformative arrest. Further, of course, of course, of
course, additionally, individuals might prospectively, retrospectively, and god’s-eye-view, as it were, not want this
mixing to occur(!!!), for any personal reason at all, including things like tangling or gumming up.

***

This can all be very tricky to talk about, for several reasons. (Note, when I say “talk about,” here, I mean “talk
about,” in general, not about any particular concrete incident or ongoingly extended situation. Though, both sorts of
discussions can be good. Importantly, any particular person might not want to talk about this sort of thing with any
other particular person, for any reason at all, including the avoidance of any (additional) possible subtle (or not at
all subtle) effects between those two people.)

(1) First, all this can be scary and weird. Sometimes people merely marvel at things in this neighborhood, “I became so
close to my class/cohort/group, that I would have committed crimes with them or jumped off a bridge with them.” And
other times, it’s deeply upsetting and disregulating in a way that lingers—a person might feel diminished, disregulated,
and violated, at a deep level (to say the least). So, especially when it’s “really obvious,” but, also, really “alien,”
it can be tempting to deny that anything happened or to minimize its impact, and so forth. (It might be very healthy and
productive to temporarily deny and minimize, etc., for some people some of the time. People have different coping and
healing strategies.)

(2) Second, regarding belief A mixing with belief A-prime to yield belief A-double-prime, as mentioned above: There’s
sometimes an effect of something like, “I’ve always believed “A[-double-prime]”. (To imagine a concrete example, one
person might want to talk about something concrete, in a constructive manner, or a coercive manner, or anything, and the
other person might not want to talk, for any reason, well-motivated or poorly-motivated, reflectively or unreflectively,
and they might use, the assertion, “I’ve always believed ‘A’” as support. And, they could always be quite right, and the
other person could be reflectively or unreflectively gaslighting them, and so on. Hard. Tricky.)

(3) Third, people’s individuation and identity confusions can be “profoundly deep,” indeed, they can go back to very
early childhood, or earlier, and they can be cemented/reified/entrenched “ideologically.”

“Ideological,” here, means “beliefs plus plans” (as always, very loosely speaking) about how things should be, how
things should go, how things should happen, locally, globally, cosmologically, etc. “And if they *don’t* or *didn’t* go
that way, well, it’s nearly unthinkable, barely considerable, that it could go otherwise, even obviously impossible that
it could go otherwise; it would be disastrous[, evil, universe-rending, something.]”

Ideological components [explicit, unstated, never stated, reflective, or fish-in-water] could be in regard to
interpersonal care, intimacy, group dynamics, sexuality, consent, coercion, child care, elder care, autonomy, agency,
etc.

People might explicitly defend their “ideological positions” by way of all sorts of things like “civilizational
decline,” atomization, ennui, conservatism, traditionalism, naturalness, empathy, “the current state or trajectory of
the world,” science, evolution, the march of progress, morality.

And those are all very good things to think/feel about, to explore, to defend, to act from, and so on. But, there’s a
way such positions can “get stuck” and that stickiness can be traced back all the way to deep confusions about self,
other, etc.

People can profoundly disagree, in very fine-grain ways, concrete ways, abstract ways, aesthetic ways about what’s good,
ok, neutral, bad, etc. For some people, something X might seem downright critically good. For other people, that
something X might seem downright demonic, locally or long-run catastrophic.

And, because such things can be so emotionally charged, as it were, people might strongly bristle at the intimation that
their deeply held beliefs, cares, concerns, or some very narrow behavior, might have root in some “confusion,” let alone
a “childhood confusion” that is supposedly “maybe not immediately reflectively accessible[, even after thousands of
hours of meditation, or whatever.]”

X is bad, X is good, X doesn’t exist and X-prime does, X isn’t a monolith, it’s actually A, B, C, D… And each those is
bad, or good, or…

(And people can wrong, and very wrong, for a very long time. A long-term meditator might have stuff flip from good to
bad or bad to good or one way and back again, after thousands and thousands of hours of meditation, and then still yet
more thousands of hours of meditation. One might expect greater and greater convergence between people over time
[depending on one’s current beliefs about objective truth, starting conditions, nature, nurture, relative truth, bottom
up discovery, subjective and objective morality, path dependence, backtracking, reparability, losslessness, “one
reality,” and so on!]. And/but, this stuff is hard and the path is long! I personally think interpersonal convergence
can be self-aligned, bottom-up, inexorable and strong, all things being equal.)

And, so, all this “emotional charge” can make it hard to talk about things like, say, “good-faith meta-cohesion” (or
live-and-let-live!), let alone an exploration of ideas like individuation and identity confusion, let alone exploring
those confusions over a long period of time, let alone doing so if/while problematic interpersonal effects are still
happening, making it hard to interact in e.g. real time at all.

***

In conclusion, one could be thought of as sometimes having a scattering of “deep” understandings, and confusions, around
individuation, individuality, identity, personhood, will, agency, and autonomy. These understandings and confusions
ramify in ways that can sometimes have strong effects on interpersonal and group interactions, to say the least. And,
over time, an individual can resolve more and more of these confusions, using tools like meditation, making it easier
and safer to interact choicefully and flexibly and safely with other individuals and groups, or to avoid such
interactions. A long-run meditator will have a deep, functional, enacted, integrated understanding of individuality and
interconnectedness, all things being equal, though asymptotically and sometimes with abrupt reversals, along various
dimensions, late in the game. And/but, over time, one might expect more and more fruitful, safe, constructive
convergence around “goodness, safety, beliefs, plans, goals, agency, autonomy” between meditators, holding ideas about
all such things, and all this, lightly.



prenatal experiences:

[please read the section, “psychic” and “supernatural” stuff: what/how/how-not, before this section]

[cw: discusses abortion, miscarriage, and prenatal trauma]

[I’m indebted to a few collaborators for initial salience that a bunch of this was even a thing, and more.]

It’s maybe less controversial that, if one eventually encounters pretty much everything, including very early life
stuff, that one will eventually come across things like surgeries under general anesthesia and traumatic medical or
ritual events like circumcision (depending on decade born, where in the world, and parental culture.) 

As a side note, it seems like people, the bodymind, actually is/are unconscious while under general anesthesia—there’s
not some ultimately recoverable, intensely painful memory, or maybe even any sense of pain. It does seem like there’s
maybe the faintest, diffuse shadow of pain and/or some mild “blurring” around the edges of the system, as it were. But
this seems to be straightforward to clean up in meditation and doesn’t seem to heavily bottleneck people, as far as I
can tell. It might be different for different people. 

Anyway, regarding “everything,” one might note that these are things that can happen preverbally and in the seeming
“amnesia period” of early life events. So, one point, here, is that people do, in some relatively typically, fairly
discretely sense, sometimes, have recoverable early life and preverbal memories. And these, quickly or eventually, are
indeed recovered, re-experienced, and re-interpreted, etc., in meditation.

Such “particularly discrete” memories can have a strange, displaced, spatiotemporally odd, perspectivally odd, sensorily
odd flavor/sense/character, as one might expect! (And, sometimes, they’re shockingly warm, intimate, etc., e.g.
remembering being breastfed as a neonate.) The particularly vivid ones maybe tend to be fragmented and few. Mostly, this
content might be subtle, “diffused,” barely perceived undulation.

Now, more controversially, these preverbal memories extend back not just to early, postnatal experiences, but all the
way back to prenatally, to one’s time in the uterus/womb, and even to the very first moments of consciousness. (It
seems, as soon as the brain starts firing, and maybe even before, the memory system is doing its thing, and its fully
contiguous out to adult experience. Thinking about how one might “design” learning and memory, maybe this is very
elegant or hard-to-vary, evolutionarily speaking, and it’d be difficult to design some kinds of learning agents any
other way.)

There’s a particular character to prenatal memories, maybe a few particular sub-feels, depending on how far along the
nervous system and sensory system are, in development.

These feels and memories can eventually be raised, felt, experienced as a (relatively non-jarring) “flashback,”
re-experienced as such in meditation. And, one can realize that, for most people, the “prenatal feel of everything”
tends to actually be a distantly felt but pervasive backdrop of one’s adult experience! So, something about the
quasi-timeless, quasi-all-pervadingness of prenatal experiences lets such experiences maybe particularly persist and
coexist with/in/as adult experience. And, one’s personal “prenatal feel” can contribute signifcantly to one’s
“cosmology.” (One eventually explores all this in meditation; it eventually just comes up, when it’s safe, a dialogue
between different ages, “realities,” etc. and there is eventual manifoldly endorsed harmonization, integration, etc.)

During the prenatal period is when we work out our first takes on individuality, self versus other, “personhood” (in
some very rudimentary sense), agency, inside/outside/boundary/containment. Usually our first passes on these things will
be quite “confused” in various ways, and those confusions can have downstream ramifications for sensemaking through our
entire lives. Also, when things happen too intensely, too fast, too painfully, etc., we can paper over our old versions
of early conceptualization and start working off of entirely new takes. This can put twists in the system with further,
twisty, downstream effects. (All of this is eventually untangled in long-term meditation.)

Now, of course, prenatally, there is the mother—hormones, voice, body movements, heartbeat, and more. It seems many
fetuses are aware of the mother and possibly conceptually/experientially undifferentiated with the mother. The mother,
being partially separate, contributes both to successful differentiation, individuation, and conceptions of self versus
other (and more), while also being a source of confusion about these things (and more).

***

Sort of continuing to take things in order of more and more intense and controversial, recall in a previous section
about me/not-me confusions, how “mind stuff” from other people can be “in you,” with highly counterintuitive (and
controversial, and seemingly even impossible or confabulatory) fidelity, bandwidth, degree, amount, etc. This happens,
too, between mother and child. And, surely, much of this is healthy and possibly even essential to development. (Just
like postnatal babies need touch and attention, one wonders what counterfactual children of the future would be like, if
grown in artificial wombs, meters or miles away from a parent, however humane and liberating that might be along lots of
dimensions.)

Sometimes, aspects of the mother/fetus interaction can be problematic, in such example cases as the mother not wanting
to be pregnant, not wanting the child to exist, not wanting the child to think or move, mistaking control for love, and
so on. Those are sort of “easily imaginable, ‘just so’ story, cliches,” easy to back-extrapolate and confabulate, say,
in therapy. But, there seem to be consistent reports from meditators and other mind explorers that such
effects/influences/memories are real and downstream effectual for the adult mind. There is a huge range of possible
effects, beyond what one might guess—the mother’s conceptual confusions about self and other can affect a child, and so
on. A child/adult might have a feel/anticipation/belief that they shouldn’t exist or that they’re bad, which can
ultimately be traced all the way to the womb.

Assuming everyone is affected prenatally by their mother (and father, siblings, and more, by the way), it’s currently
hard to tease out how often “bad” things happen, and to what degree. There might be selection bias (and, sometimes,
confirmation bias and demand effects) amongst meditators. That is, someone who had particularly problematic prenatal
experiences might be more likely to become a meditator. So, particularly problematic prenatal experiences might not be
very common. I myself don’t have enough data, yet, about this.

In any case, it’s worth noting that the interaction between mother and fetus will be complex. A baby might only sort of
interpret the most salient themes, but, even if, say, a mother is experiencing fear and disgust, she might well also
simultaneously be experiencing love and care. So, even if there’s problematic regard, there could often be lots and lots
of good things going on, too.

Further, fetuses, babies, people, everyone makes mistakes! Even if a mother is wholeheartedly loving (which would be
superhuman!), a baby could still misinterpret something as too much attention, intensity, control, something. The baby
just might be particularly sensitive or might have an unfortunate misinterpretation of something.

So, I’ll just note that this stuff is hard, life is hard, this stuff is subtle and barely talked about, and everyone’s
doing their best, lots of good stuff happens, and sometimes bad stuff happens, too. And, all things being equal, all the
bad stuff is retroactively correctable, in principle, with meditation and other approaches. To borrow an old saying,
it’s never too late [for a meditator] to have a good childhood (and prenatal experience), as it were.

***

Ok, so there’s one more thing to mention, in this section, and that is miscarriages, abortions, and older siblings.

It seems to be the case that prior fetuses leave a “pattern,” as it were, “in” the mother, that are
conceptually/spatiotemporally/experientially localized to the womb. And, this pattern is durable/stable/lasting and can
“picked up” and (mis)interpreted by subsequent fetuses.

Leading to the above, I (and other collaborators, who first made this phenomenon salient to me) have encountered
multiple, first-hand reports of people, while in the womb, [proto-]fearing that they would have the same fate as a
miscarried or aborted fetus, or, say, believing, confusedly, that they were an aborted fetus (and so were a sort of
living dead zombie person), and so on.

My dataset is currently small, so I don’t know how many people who’ve come across such things, in meditation, have then
verified them with their mother or through records. (I’m not saying that is or isn’t a good idea!) It’s partially
confounded by how normal and common miscarriages are and how they sometimes go undetected.

(Interestingly, everyone so far in my dataset was firstborn, so I don’t know what it’s like to encounter prior
patterns/traces of one’s older siblings as a fetus.)

***

This has been a difficult section to first-pass draft, because it could come off as mom-blame-y as well as sort of
fatalistic, regarding far-reaching, possible harms in the distant past that we had no control over. And then there’s how
unbelievable some of this stuff is, if one hasn’t experienced some aspect of it, firsthand. And, finally, there’s even
the political/ideological and moral elements, regarding prenatal experiences and downstream effects.

(Regarding “proof” of all of this, beyond meditation, some mothers will be like “of course,” as well as shamans,
bodyworkers, healers, etc.)

Anyway, this section has focused sort of on the “bad/traumatic cases” because that’s what can tend to bottleneck and
then saliently come up in meditation.

But, between mother and child (and father and other siblings and family members, both prenatally and postnatally), we
also learn about love, compassion, warmth, safety, and much more.

Resources permitting, a mother, as a skilled meditator, might perhaps(???) work through remaining, prior womb patterns
before conceiving another child. This could, of course, be outrageously stringent and costly. (And there might even be
good reasons for not doing this that aren’t yet well understood. As always: meta protocol, etc.)

And, but, so, in any case, in principle, resources permitting, as I mentioned a bit above, minds are “lossless” in a way
that allows for sort of “clean healing”, clean reinterpretation, clean re-understanding from any badness, trauma,
misinterpretation, etc., all the way back to the first moments of consciousness. So, whatever experiences someone has
prenatally, this is sort of all accounted for in the “10,000 hour” estimate of how long-ish it takes for a hardcore
meditator to sort of asymptote. All of this section is accounted in that time estimate. All of this comes up naturally
and is handleable, if it does. And having skimmed this section, hopefully it’ll all go fractionally more smoothly.



direct and indirect people and group stuff:

[please read the section, “psychic” and “supernatural” stuff: what/how/how-not, before this section]

In terms of accumulating “patterns,” and so on, from other people, it’s sometimes helpful to be on the lookout for
things from various places. Sometimes things can be “directly” from another person; sometimes things can be “indirectly”
from another person; and sometimes things are more “averaged,” across people or timespans.

In the course of meditation, one might seemingly find things from the people and places below. It’s of course possible
to imagine, confabulate, and to be wrong, even while one gains more confidence over time about what’s what. It’s good to
hold it all provisionally. Sometimes things can be imagined or confabulated by other people, which are misrepresented as
being from another person, place, or time than their actual provenance. Sometimes it just doesn’t matter whether it’s
“actually” X (or how X got there), and sometimes it does! Sometimes one might want to explore or confirm or
cross-correlate (“indirect”) things with respect to family and history, and sometimes that won’t be constructive or it
won’t be possible. Over time, one gains more facility with both provisionality and constructiveness, with respect to all
this kind of stuff.

“Things” that you “find,” which could be feelings, patterns, sentiments, impulses… can be abuse-related, trauma-related,
violent, sexual, coercive, etc. One may well encounter positive things, too. Positive things tend to be less apparent
because they’ve become more integrated, metabolized. Negative things tend to be more “coaleseced,” “object-like,”
“thing-like,” which is can make it seem like there’s more negative than positive, generally, even when that’s not the
case.

lovers nuclear family extended family parents grandparents great grandparents… friends friendship group stuff small
group activity stuff cohousing stuff workplace stuff community stuff the cultural milieu “great power” ideologies your
religious or ethnic culture, belief, metaphysics, or cosmology other religious or ethnic culture, belief, metaphysics,
or cosmology secular/“secular” contemporary culture, belief, metaphysics, or cosmology secular/“secular” contemporary
subgroups’, belief, metaphysics, or cosmology nationalist ideologies global conflicts cultural and historical “curses”
cultural and historical “paranoia”, fear, trauma, etc. generational salience, trauma, and ideology from the past 10-50
years salience, trauma, ideology, colonialism from the past several hundred years belief, religion, cosmology from
different parts of the world, seemingly going back thousands of years or into prehistory



teaching and learning and creating and relating (meditation and anything):



teaching:



no one gets pixel-perfect possibilities:

[Originally published: https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2020/09/03/no-one-gets-pixel-perfect-possibilities/ (Last
accessed: 2020-09-05)]

There’s an intuition I’m working on conveying, which I think applies to [all transformative practices, including the
preliminary/auxiliary practices], everything.

For those interested, maybe consider this color sorter:

http://jackxmorris.com/posts/color-sort

I would click on bubble sort. (I think this sorter doesn’t quite finish, but the analogy holds).

[If the website dies or the images get lost: There’s this big square, still image image that looks mostly an ugly gray,
with faint heterogeneity in its pixel colors, little glimmers of color. You can click buttons that say e.g. “bubble
sort.” And, when one of the buttons is clicked, the pixels start to get sorted by an algorithm, and a columnwise rainbow
starts to appear, filling the whole image, made up of only pixels that were already present, yet in an order that hid
the potential rainbow. Finally, buggy-javascript-dependent, there’s a “perfect rainbow.”]

There’s a low-key, leaky-abstraction sense in which there’s a real, true, final “pixel perfect” state of (body)mind, at
the end of meditation. The abstraction leaks, in a bunch of ways, maybe, in that the mind doesn’t know or need to know,
at the beginning what rainbows are, that they exist, that pixels exist, all sorts of stuff. And, there’s no perfect, no
final end, no fixed goal, etc. And, from the inside, the process needs exploration, experimentation, creativity, and
self-authority, not rote/mechanical color sorting.

But, sort of, in some sense, (a) pixel-perfect precision, and (b) something like really-there, absolute, objective
patterning/ordering (like a rainbow)— analogously, analogously, analogously—are a thing.

My concern with circling, somatic experiencing, nedera, etc., is that they’re seductive in the ways that THEY PRODUCE
EFFECTS unlike just about everything else that’s out there. They are true advances. I’m so grateful they exist.

And/but, long-run, they sort of trade off on local versus global. Like, they can make little rainbows (highly valued
breakthroughs, changes, something) in some local area, while fucking up a bunch of shit outside that local area,
sometimes, in ways that are hard to detect and realize.

(And it’s all fixable! It’s fine! Lossless rewind, long run. And, for any particular person, doing nedera or etc., is,
for sure, the right strategic move for them, in terms of life situation or total path length, or whatever.)

But, almost no system seems to get this “pixel-perfect” thing.

(This is for sure not a denial of nebulosity, emptiness, etc. The “pixel-perfect” thing accounts for these. It’s just an
analogy. It’s also beyond arhatship, though; it’s the deconditioning that continues, through proper practice, after
arhatship.)

There’s sort of this belief, maybe, with all these systems, that “if I just keep going,” either in a straight line or
picking off issues, one by one, as they come up, then “that’s enough, that will get me what I’m looking for.”

And there’s a sense in which that’s true:

The mind IS always working on heading in the right direction, unwinding, unknotting, etc. The mind is ALWAYS working on
doing the pixel-perfect thing. That’s what the mind naturally, spontaneously does.

But.

I can’t speak well to other systems, except for local interactions I have with practitioners in them, small-n
impressions. But, I think with respect to those systems, and certainly with “meditation” we see side-effects, muscle
tension, distress, plus sometimes a belief that “it’s part of the process,” or even “it’s somehow my own fault.” To be
sure, even when meditation goes perfectly, it’s usually a rough ride. But when things get rough, people often start
mashing buttons harder, because of the intermittent really good stuff that happens in the roughness. But the roughness
isn’t long-run costless, depending on what the person is trying to ultimately do.

In any case, there’s a loose mechanism, here, that I can point to, that’s one of the problematic things:

When someone does (a) any sort of reaching, pushing, forcing, scraping the bottom, and then (b) sort of pivots to doing
something else, in the next moment, without “cleaning up,” without “taking one’s foot off the gas”—that reaching,
pushing, forcing, scraping tends to still be operative, in the “place that the person just was, e.g. attentionally.

It’s like a pushy/reachy/grabby/scrape-y process gets left behind, that’s sort of operating mindlessly and autonomously,
in the background, underneath stuff, and it’s dragging stuff around, in weird directions, kind of warping the whole
system over time, if left long enough.

And we all start out with “knots” and “slack” and/but these techniques, used unreflectively or not meta-systematically,
eventually can start pulling those knots tight, which makes them long-run harder to unknot, and it leads to distress,
behavioral rigidity, emotional suppression, and sometimes impulsive behavior or a diminished behavioral repertoire.

Often, especially in the beginning ALL SORTS of good stuff will happen, because the bodymind is exercising new degrees
of freedom and really smart about grabbing value, and these techniques are cool and brilliant.

But, there’s also a sense in which they can and do make a mess, a mess that can keep getting worse autonomously, and
they all have large tail risk, in my opinion. (So does my stuff, to be fair).

There’s still all sorts of reasons to do these things–to learn new degrees of freedom for the bodymind, to meet cool
people, to learn from people with lots of experience. And, the benefit/risk often comes down to the actual person
leading, facilitating, mentoring, as well as the actual other people attending the event, because of interpersonal vibe
and nonverbal stuff.

And, when engaged reflectively, sensitively, responsively, meta-systematically, all of these tools, and/or the
fine-grain best parts of them, have a place in personal practice, of course.

But so few people seem to really get this “pixel perfect rainbow” thing, and so I see SO FEW mentors or teachers who
are, in my opinion, correctly balancing local with global, short-run with long-run, when interacting with clients,
students, workshop attendees, etc. Frankly, I think it’s because they haven’t gotten far enough to realize that this
“pixel-perfect rainbow thing” is even a thing. But they absolutely could. And I could be wrong about something, etc.



guided on-ramp for main practice p2: [draft]

(a) let bodymind wander [baseline, glue that can hold it all together] 30s-5 min

(b) if notice your bodymind doing something “good,” just be like “alright, cool” 30s-5 min

(c) if notice that could do/add something good, gently try [ok if bodymind does it for you], if can’t, gently take foot
off trying gas completely. 30s - 5 min

(d) if notice bodymind doing something “bad,” just be like “alright, that’s ok” 30s-5 min

(e) if notice that you could stop something “bad” that’s already happening, gently try [ok if bodymind does it for you],
if you find you can’t, just be like “alright, that’s ok” and gently take foot of trying gas completely 30s-5 min

(f) if notice that you could stop something “bad” from starting, gently try [ok if bodymind does it for you], if you
find you can’t, just be like “alright, that’s ok” and gently take foot off trying gas completely 30s-5 min

(g) now patiently, slowly interleave (a)-(f) in a single practice, as you are so moved or as salience changes 30s-5min

(h) meta protocol

(j) if there’s something that you want to be different, and it’s good/safe/ok to do the following, try gently directly
inclining, willing, intending towards that desired difference to be actualized. if anything feels gummy, jammy, bad,
forced then gently take foot off trying gas completely.

[(k) explore deliberate or participatory surrender, acceptance, letting go, somewhat as per (a)]



learning:



technical debt, meditation, and minds:

[Originally published: https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2019/04/11/technical-debt-meditation-and-minds/ (Last
accessed: 2020-09-05)]

>>>
Technical debt (also known as design debt or code debt) is a concept in software development that reflects the implied
cost of additional rework caused by choosing an easy solution now instead of using a better approach that would take
longer.

Technical debt can be compared to monetary debt.[3] If technical debt is not repaid, it can accumulate ‘interest’,
making it harder to implement changes later on. Unaddressed technical debt increases software entropy. Technical debt is
not necessarily a bad thing, and sometimes (e.g., as a proof-of-concept) technical debt is required to move projects
forward. On the other hand, some experts claim that the “technical debt” metaphor tends to minimize the impact, which
results in insufficient prioritization of the necessary work to correct it.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technical_debt (Last accessed: 2020-09-05) <<<

People have really been liking this metaphor, so I thought it would be good to explicitly call it out in a post. It’s
not even really a metaphor; it’s just what’s happening.

When a mind is really surprised, or things are happening too fast, or something is just too hard, or a mind enacts
ingrained bad habits, in all these cases a mind takes on technical debt in order to keep dealing with the world in real
time. The more technical debt a mind has, the harder it is for that mind to solve problems moving forward, so technical
debt begets more technical debt.

Technical debt is hard to pay off. Sleep hacks away it and normal problem solving hacks away at it too. For the most
part, though, most people are steadily accumulating technical debt their entire lives. That’s why you can’t teach an old
dog new tricks or whatever, and I’m suspicious that e.g. the first-language learning window is anything special at all.
I think that window closes because of normal processes that are always at work. (And second and nth languages get
literally laid down in different places in the mind/brain.) That’s more elegant than supposing there’s like a special
language learning window.

One way to look at meditation is that correct meditation pays off technical debt faster than it accumulates until it’s
all paid off. As far as I can tell, this is very related to why some traditions call the enlightened mind the natural
state. All those invariant structures get shipped around or homomorphically transformed until everything is in the right
place–all the gradients and attractive basins that are pushing or pulling all the time, all the things that a mind would
want to do if it could only figure out how, that all gets to happen. As far as I can tell, minds are really only trying
to do one thing all the time, somethingsomething elegance collapse in terms of a predictive world model or something.

Most meditative practices or at least most practitioners’ interpretation of meditative practices actually increase
technical debt!

Most meditative practices or at least most practitioners’ interpretation of meditative practices actually increase
technical debt!

Most meditative practices or at least most practitioners’ interpretation of meditative practices actually increase
technical debt!

One can get all sorts of positive effects, for months or even years, but eventually things grind to a halt, the
practitioner tangles themselves into a corner or piles just too much stuff onto too much stuff.

In particular there’s a right way and a wrong way to use the maps or descriptions of valued states.

If you’re like trying to directly see things as empty or you’re “trying on” spiritual perspectives or construals, or
trying to get particular isolated things to stick, whether you succeed or not, you’re probably taking on technical debt.

You can actually get some number of really real attainments, not fake versions, at the expense of increasing technical
debt. But if you want all the attainments, or you want to make it all the way, you have to do it in a direction of
decreasing technical debt.

Are you increasing technical debt or paying it off in your practice? How can you tell?

[See the meta protocol.]



a spectulative comment on language learning:

[Originally published:
https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2019/04/11/technical-debt-meditation-and-minds/#comment-1962 (Last accessed:
2020-09-05)]

I predict that someone very far along on the meditative path, who puts in the time to learn a second language or to
polish a second language that they learned after early childhood, will end up with that second language “mixed in” with
their first language. In other words, the fluently multilingual advanced meditator will have a more similar brain, in
the relevant ways, to a “natively multilingual” person, someone who grew up speaking multiple languages, than other
later-in-life bilingual or multilingual individuals.

It’s not automatic; you don’t get it for free by taking classes or something. You do have to do a special thing that
looks more like meditation than study and practice, in addition to whatever else one normally does to learn a language
(drill, immersion, etc.)

Generally speaking, correct meditation “puts things in the right places” in the brain. And generally you learn how to
learn better (across hundreds and hundreds if not thousands of hours).

As I’ve gotten a taste for this, I have indeed thought about gaining “fluency all the way down” in a second or third
language. It’s a very large time investment, though, some fraction of the total number of real-time hours of language
use in one’s entire life thus far, because of how stuff gets laid down in the brain. And so I think the opportunity cost
may be prohibitive. But it would be a finite amount of time, a non-insane thing that someone could reasonably do, and
it’s on my maybe list.

There are lots of cool things in this space, for social interaction, sports, intellectual abilities, stroke victims,
PTSD… Anything that you use a brain for… This stuff is very, very, very cool.

I currently believe that this works almost just as well for an eighty-year-old as a twenty-five-year-old meditator. The
eighty-year-old may need a few thousand more hours to get to the bottom, depending on how learning and compression
actually work, because they’ve been alive longer, but I imagine it’s pretty practically finite, all things being equal.

I believe that the ways in which some subset of eighty-year-olds (or forty-year-olds or fifty-year-olds or
thirty-five-year-olds) are mentally X is often or even usually because of “technical debt” and not some sort of cellular
senescence or something. I think the operating characteristics are the same from one acquiring one’s first couple of
wired-together neurons until (a little after) medical death. I think that the “technical debt” explanation is more
elegant because there are sharp-as-a-tack 80-year-olds walking around, and even a confused 80-year-old is doing
astonishingly complex real-time learning with their mind, in every waking moment, that is not really different in kind
from a baby’s mind. I claim.



technical debt and inverse operations:


[Originally published: https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2020/07/10/technical-debt-and-inverse-operations/ (Last
accessed: 2020-09-05)]


[Thanks to one of my collaborators whose questions stimulated this post.]

One could imagine a model of mind involving the accumulation and cancellation of technical debt. So, say, a person goes
through life and has experiences of types A, B, and C, which add imprints of those experiences to their mind:

ABC

One could imagine experiences of these types accumulating further:

ABC ABC

But, let’s say a person has inverse operations -A, -B, -C. Then, while meditating, or in the midst of life, that person
could apply those inverse operations to pay off technical debt:

ABC -A ABC

 BC ABC

Let’s say the set of inverse operations, -A, -B, -C are enough for most life experiences. But, every once in a while
something surprising and novel happens, like Z.

 BCZ ABC

A person doesn’t have inverse operations for some things, so, all things being equal, over time, for an untrained mind,
that person’s (body)mind will slowly accumulate technical debt over time.

Additionally, say a person goes on vacation or starts taking long walks, all things being equal, they will only ever be
able to pay off so much technical debt, because they lack inverse operations for “deeper accumulation.”

   ZQRS DEF GHI ...

In the example above, even if a person pays off all their ABC, they’re still slowly accumulating new technical debt, and
they don’t have inverse operations for older and very old technical debt D, E, F, G, H, I… (And, they’ll encounter more
ABC in life, so there’s sort of a dynamic equilibrium that people find themselves in, absent meditation or other
transformative practice.)

(Recall, so-called “technical debt” reduces slack/creativity/flexibility in the mind and begets more technical debt.)

Ok, so, part of what meditation is, is discovering new inverse operations and building (sometimes temporary)
infrastructure to support (and discover) more inverse operations.

So, an advanced meditator will be doing a tremendous amount of undoing, via a large collection of inverse operations, as
well as plenty of creative doing, for learning and staging future learning, doing, and undoing.

And, the very advanced meditator will sort of have a fine-grain “omnidirectional undoer” running at all times, and will
effortlessly, costlessly, fully embody something like that, such that all their actions are sort of fluid and flexible
and (relatively) “karmically free,” because all doing (and experiencing) is self-met with undoing, as needed. And, if
something super surprising happens, and a lot of novel, not-yet-invertible accumulation happens, there’s a tremendous
amount of latent skill that immediately starts puzzle solving for new inverse operations, as needed.

To the degree people don’t eventually get overwhelmed with all their stuff, everyone already has a lot of inverse
operations, as it were, and everyone does get new ones, in therapy, journaling, long walks, talking with friends, and so
on. Though, for most people, they are net accumulating technical debt versus net decreasing technical debt, over time.
And, learning to meditate, eventually, tips the balance of accumulation versus not to the side of net decreasing
(nonmonotonically), over time.

(Remember, local accumulation isn’t bad, in a vacuum; it’s extremely useful! Accumulation can be highly strategic for
the purposes of future payoff, and so on.)

It can take a long time to sort of “phenomenologically align” with “undoing as such” to sort of knowingly, directly
facilitate, participate, allow it as it’s happening. It’ll of course have always already been happening, to some degree,
and it comes to happen more and more, unreflectively, prereflectively, and spontaneously, too. Eventually, it’s just a
seamless, costless, creative thing that’s happening a ton, along with everything else in the mind, that the mind
anticipatorily and skillfully inclines towards, as needed.

***

So the above is sort of simplified intellectual model, that leaves out stuff about “concrete sensory impressions,” and
much more.

And the “real thing” is felt, sensuous, embodied (and intellectual, and daydreaming, and getting lost in life, and
everything).

One does more and more stuff that kind of maps-ish to the intellectual model above, by, well, meditating. Wellbeing,
relief, insight can be clues of heading in the right direction, though plenty of clues feel pretty bleh, too,
contextually.

Meditation is felt wayfinding, meditation is felt puzzle-solving.



merely just having the experience itself, and, technical debt is good, actually:

[Originally published:
https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2020/08/17/merely-just-having-the-experience-itself-and-technical-debt-is-good-actually/
(Last accessed: 2020-09-05)]

Pre-notes:

[Thank you to at least three different interactions amongst collaborators and students for inspiring this post and for
some fun pieces.]

[This is a draft.]

[All my posts on “technical debt”: https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/?s=technical+debt ]

[There is a P.S. at the bottom.]

I wanted to make sure that people don’t get too afraid of “accruing technical debt.” It’s a leaky abstraction, for one
thing, even though it really, really fits. ***

Trying out a bunch of things, having a ton of plates spinning, keeping a lot of balls in the air, being in a new job, a
new relationship, a new hobby—these kinds of things will tend to accrue technical debt. Prior to having put in tons and
tons of meditation time, there’s sort of just too much going on to easily “integrate” in real time (or in stolen
moments, or on long walks, or in meditation), because integration, when needed, takes real time, and sometimes a lot of
time.

One can tell they’re maybe accruing technical debt (accumulating karma, in another model) if they have to kind of use a
bunch of willpower, or push through a bit, to show up for things or to get things done, some of the time—or, even if not
being “pushy,” if one’s “mental checklists” kind of go into overdrive.

There’s an arguable phrase in the software industry world, “always be shipping.” Maybe, here, it’s something like,
“always be living.”

Part of having a good life is sometimes doing a ton of stuff, that gets really ragged around the edges, and/or you get
really ragged around the edges. But, that’s ok:

Have all the experiences, so you know what’s out there and what you want!

There’s a real/fake way in which there’s always enough time—like, even if things feel crazy, if you were to sort of put
everything on your calendar and just show up to everything, that would just work, in some abstract fake world, that
ignores how minds work. Everything fits on your calendar.

But the mind doesn’t work like that, and you don’t work like that, and something would maybe break, somewhere, sometimes
(demotivation, forgetting things, who knows). The felt complexity is sort of the “inelegances” bursting at the seams,
the puzzle pieces that don’t quite fit because the bodymind hasn’t had time to kind of whirl it all around into
settled-yet-shimmering elegance. Life sensemaking.

And, so, sometimes, one needs a break, a weekend, long walks, a full-on retreat. And sometimes one needs periods of
their life where they’re doing less, or, say, putting e.g. meditation first.

But, when that’s not going on, maybe, then—”always be living.”

It’s ok to bumble through, sometimes at max crazy complexity. Have all the experiences.

***

If one takes the meditation journey, which does require some time and space, during some periods, for various kinds of
nonmonotonicities, including making it over various technical debt payback humps (this is is one place I sometimes
equivocated-ly use the term “escape velocity”), then here’s what eventually happens:

There’s a simplicity on the far side of complexity—successive “elegance collapses” (though it’s, on net, much more
incremental than dramatic “collapses;” it’s tiny changes over a very long period of time, with maybe a few big
whooshes).

Most people, at first, have a few big “mind zones,” two to five, at least: different, big parts of mind space, or, like,
maybe everything “in here,” and then everything “out there.” (Also, here’s another thing, too, that’s barely a metaphor:
minds are also composed of layers and layers of “virtual machines”).

What happens, through meditation, is that the whole thing starts to integrate and unify (cf. nonduality). There’s just
eventually just “one thing,” and, rather than these “zones” having to spend a lot of time sort of translating back and
forth across interfaces and impedance mismatch, with gazillions of buggy microservices all bumbling along, runaway
processes spinning, with periodic reboots—over time, there’s just one single integrated thing, humming along.

Further, mind (bodymind, memory, something), becomes more and more “content addressable.” [1,2] That is, the mind
rearranges itself, more and more, so that “the right surfaces are exposed at the right times,” and information is
shipped to where it needs to go, more and more efficiently, with less and less hops and, so, less and less time needed.

(So there a way in which there’s dramatically less and less need for cognition, over time.)

And, so, over time, more and more, MERELY JUST HAVING THE SENSORY EXPERIENCE ITSELF completely replaces “cognition.”

Experience is memory is integration is anticipation, loosely speaking.

Context switching, pre-prep, “post-prep,” becomes less and less of a thing. “How do you do so much? / I never leave my
meditation cushion.”

And so when the monk returns the marketplace with helping hands, they are vastly less likely to accrue technical debt,
because everything is operating more efficiently, in this simplicity on the far side of complexity.

In the steelmanned ideal, they’ll be able to do so much more—more responsibilities, more details, costlessly,
effortlessly, easefully. (And they’ll be, proactively, both solving and dissolving that complexity along the way.)

And, if they do accrue technical debt, as everyone does, in the course of even a single day, they can pay it down much
more efficiently, because of extreme practice and skill at omni-directional “refactoring,” as it were.

When things are too fast, too intense, too surprising, in a bad way, or a good way, technical debt will accrue and
that’s fine! Over minutes, hours, days or weeks!

It’s about having a good life, and that’s about having concrete, sensuous experiences, with other people, in all their
messy contingency. And/but, one is more and more prepared for that, and it gets easier and easier, to just get lost in
life in a good way.

***

[1] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content-addressable_memory

[2] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associative_array

***

P.S. What of the cliche of “broken monks?”

I’m claiming, long-run, meditation makes one more effective.

But, if meditation has been around for thousands of years, where are all the Gandhi-Elon-Musks [sic]? That’s a really
long conversation, involving sociology and epistemic viciousness, but here’s part of it:

A key thing is multidimensional, relatively phase-decorrelated, nonmonotonicity. That is, things are getting better and
worse along different dimensions and timescales, and, with enough complexity, something is always in a valley, some of
the time: For a meditator in the middle of their journey, something’s always broken, at any given time, generally
speaking.

And, if a system is relatively fragile, in a technical sense, that is, if, say, four out of five or five out of five
pieces are working, then system output is 90-100, but, if only three or four pieces out of five are working, then system
output is two or three, then you get “broken monks.”

Instead of five, you know, substitute millions, and so on. Anyway, that’s one piece of this.

But, the whole journey is practically finite, and people do pop out on the other side, and so on. This is just a model,
it’s messier than this, and there’s room for proactivity and slack, and so on, but most people will still have
hard-to-predict, rough ride, in at least some places.

And this is part of why there can be claims of effortless complexity, while at the same time having broken monks, while
at the same time keeping an eye out for Gandhi-Elon-Musks.



meditation indirectly discloses domain knowledge:

[Originally published:
https://meditationstuff.wordpress.com/2020/06/01/meditation-indirectly-discloses-domain-knowledge/ (Last accessed:
2020-09-06)]

grateful hat-tip to an indirect collaborator for raising this issue and offering these quotes:

>>>
https://www.mctb.org/mctb2/table-of-contents/part-v-awakening/37-models-of-the-stages-of-awakening/the-specific-knowledge-models/

On a totally different tangent, the specific knowledge models basically state or imply that awakening will somehow
magically provide hidden conceptual information about all sorts of specific things in life, such as the workings of
particle physics, how to bring about world peace, who our disciples should marry, and the like. Some go further and
state that enlightenment progressively brings complete omniscience, meaning the ability to know everything
simultaneously about every single part and particle of the entire at least eight hundred trillion mile–wide universe.

[…]

While these might seem to some people like reasonable things awakened beings should somehow know, let’s include other
things it might be good to know, such as how to create safe, inexpensive lithium ion batteries for electric cars, how to
consistently beat the return of an S&P 500 index fund over the long haul, how to balance the federal deficit while
providing everyone with outstanding social services and not raising taxes, how to instantaneously make every blue-collar
Republican realize that they are voting against their own self-interest, and how to build a fusion reactor that is safe,
inexpensive, produces enough energy for everyone on the planet, and has no radioactive disposal issues. When you
consider these, the concept of specific knowledge gained by merely seeing the true nature of ordinary sensations begins
to seem as ridiculous as it really is. <<<

>>>
https://www.aft.org/sites/default/files/periodicals/Crit_Thinking.pdf

After more than 20 years of lamentation, exhortation, and little improvement, maybe it’s time to ask a fundamental
question: Can critical thinking actually be taught? Decades of cognitive research point to a disappointing answer: not
really. People who have sought to teach critical thinking have assumed that it is a skill, like riding a bicycle, and
that, like other skills, once you learn it, you can apply it in any situation. Research from cognitive science shows
that thinking is not that sort of skill. The processes of thinking are intertwined with the content of thought (that is,
domain knowledge). Thus, if you remind a student to “look at an issue from multiple perspectives” often enough, he will
learn that he ought to do so, but if he doesn’t know much about an issue, he _can’t_ think about it from multiple
perspectives. You can teach students maxims about how they ought to think, but without background knowledge and
practice, they probably will not be able to implement the advice they memorize. Just as it makes no sense to try to
teach factual content without giving students opportunities to practice using it, it also makes no sense to try to teach
critical thinking devoid of factual content. <<<

Ok. There is nuance that many meditation teachers don’t grasp, OR they DO grasp it, to a greater or lesser degree, but
they are simply offering a precise, skilled, one-sided correction to people who think meditation will confer direct
mystical knowledge on how to pick stocks, heal interpersonal relationships, or cure cancer.

So, there are TWO types of knowledge.

(1)

First, there is knowledge that is true, all the time, everywhere, such as the laws of physics, laws of mind, and
phenomenology, as it were (the latter two loosely speaking). For these, any individual person has an extremely
OVERDETERMINED dataset, by the time they’re maybe just weeks or a few years old. (It’s not the kind of physics data that
will output quantum mechanics or string theory, but still.) This dataset is sufficient to yield insight into emptiness,
the true nature of (body)mind, some aspects of physical grace, and, qualifiedly, almost-unconditional wellbeing.

Furthermore, insight into knowledge of mind, all things being equal, will boost IQ and general thinking skills! IQ is
not hardwired, nor is “thinking,” except for a slight limning of development and genetics. Intelligence is 99% malleable
software.

The reason that “critical thinking can’t be taught,” and the reason that the world isn’t filled with
meditator-Einstein’s, is that gradual, and sometimes sudden upgrades in reasoning can take thousands of hours of
not-McMindfulness, to yield fruit. The brain changes slowly. It takes on the order of 10,000 hours (yeah, that
popularized-for-shaky-reasons number, but really) to “turn over the whole mind, for the first time,” though plenty of
stuff will contingently happen before that time interval elapses.

(2)

Now, there is also the second type of knowledge. In addition to what is always true, everywhere, as I put it, Ingram
points out that pesky domain knowledge is a thing:

For a new human, aside from those universal types of data, mentioned above, that massively overdetermined implications,
there all also true unknown unknowns, from that new human’s point of view.

But, setting aside, for a moment, those true unknown unknowns, there are also knowable unknowns, which are knowable
through personal action (experiment) and inference (theorizing), as it were. [Edit 2020-09-06: Further, I should have
made the point, here, too, that the “relative” world is massively overdetermined, highly self-correlated, and coherent,
all things being equal, as well. It’s possible to know so, so much, from sparse, thin slices, if those slices used
properly and sought out, as needed, as per below.]

To make an extended analogy, science was a civilizational upgrade for the acceleration of converting knowable unknowns
to the known and for pushing out the unknowable to the “true bleeding edge” of “real” unknown unknowns, as they disclose
surprise, or not, according to necessity and contingency.

So, analogously to civilizational-science-as-upgrade, now, for an individual, good meditation is, over time, like
personal science (ultimately effortless, partially-implicit, costless), a bare-metal epistemic upgrade that improves
that meta-bootstrapping process of ever more proactive and effective knowledge-seeking [Edit 2020-09-06: and
evidence-using]. An advanced meditator (using a fully comprehensive system) will eventually be experimenting more,
faster, more frequently, more effectively/constructively, less dangerously, with better implicit and explicit
theoretical frameworks, to acquire raw data to feed into the [Edit: 2020-09-06 proactive and spontaneous] generation of
personal moral and practical domain knowledge (and ever-better epistemics).

(I think meditation teachers hate to go anywhere near any of this, because fallible meditation teachers and sociopathic
gurus, with necessarily imperfect meditation methods, make harmful mistakes ALL THE TIME. And, when someone gets hurt,
it’s often way better to assume ignorance, blindspots, or myopic malevolence than to assume a teacher or guru is playing
long-run benevolent, n-dimensional chess. So, yeah, suggesting that meditation teachers have domain knowledge can be
very fraught, without also communicating how to assess a teacher’s domain knowledge, along particular dimensions. And
that’s it’s own chicken-egg problem. So, sometimes, it’s better to not talk about POTENTIAL meta-bootstrapping
meditative epistemic upgrades at all, if they’ll be unreflectively read into seeming advanced meditators. But, we do
value the practical wisdom and physical grace of some meditation masters–so when people deny it’s a thing it all, it
seems potentially contradictory and self-defeating, for a community.)

(conclusion)

To summarize, meditation is a vehicle for disclosing both absolute and relative (domain) truths.

And, one eventually runs out of absolute truths, to discover and align with.

But, our expanding light cone retains the possibility of truly surprising us, in very mundane ways, as well as very
not-mundane ways, as things disclose across the “unknown unknown boundary.” But, we can be ever-more-skillfully-poised,
truly as best we know how, as best we can do, at any particular moment in our personal lifetime, or history, to
facilitate and grab that possibly surprising data, the instant it appears, to wring out every last bit of de-fanged
uncertainty, safety, joy, excitement, sociology, non-authoritarian governance, humane biomedical engineering, world
peace, intimacy, and wellbeing it can offer. And meditation is especially suited to facilitate that poise, all things
being equal.



relating:



in-relationship foreclosing legacy of past interaction: [stub]

Past interactions in relationship preclude and foreclose types of interactions and concrete interactions in the future,
unless actions are taken to (re(?)-)open those possibilities. Meta-communication is a route, that complements other
routes, to that (re(?)-)opening.



creating:



randomness/arbitrariness, unpunished, as necessary data: [not yet written]

An organism needs to be able to "randomly/arbitrary" experiment in order to generate data that becomes an input into
learning.



bibliography (incomplete):

(*) https://jhanajenny.com/paragon-tantric-practice/ (Last accessed: 2019-07-04; 11:16 CDT) (*) EMDR Up Close:
Subtleties of Trauma Processing 1st Edition by Dr. Philip Manfield. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform; 1
edition (September 16, 2013). ISBN-10: 1492399620. ISBN-13: 978-1492399629 (*)
https://www.google.com/search?q=descartes+rules+for+the+direction+of+the+mind (*)
https://www.google.com/search?q=spinoza+emendation+of+the+intellect (*) Ingram, Daniel M. Mastering the Core Teachings
of the Buddha: An Unusually Hardcore Dharma Book (Revised and Expanded). Red Wheel/Weiser, 2018. (*) Goode, Greg. The
direct path: A user guide. New Harbinger Publications, 2012. (*) Goode, Greg. After Awareness: The End of the Path. New
Harbinger Publications, 2016. (*) Allione, Tsultrim. Feeding your demons: Ancient wisdom for resolving inner conflict.
Little, Brown Spark, 2008. (*) Johnson, Will. Aligned, relaxed, resilient: The physical foundations of mindfulness.
Shambhala Publications, 2000. (*) Gendlin, Eugene T. Focusing. Bantam, 1982. (*) Gendlin, Eugene T. Experiencing and the
creation of meaning: A philosophical and psychological approach to the subjective. Northwestern University Press, 1997.
(*) Earley, Jay. Self-Therapy: A Step-By-Step Guide to Creating Inner Wholeness Using Ifs, a New, Cutting-Edge Therapy.
Hillcrest Publishing Group, 2009. (*) Andreas, Connirae, and Tamara Andreas. "Core transformation." Constructive
Therapies V2 2 (1998): 275. (*) https://www.google.com/search?q=connirae+andreas+coming+to+wholeness (*) Grimes, Pierre,
and Regina L. Uliana. Philosophical midwifery: A new paradigm for understanding human problems with its validation.
Hyparxis Press, 1998. (*) Ericsson, K. Anders, and Herbert A. Simon. Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data. the MIT
Press, 1984. (*) Demmin, Herbert S. A Theory of the Microdynamics of Occurrent Thought. Lexington Books, 2015. (*)
Demmin, Herbert. Ghosts of Consciousness: Thought and the Spiritual Path. Paragon House, 2003. (*) Boisvert, Mathieu.
The five aggregates: Understanding Theravada psychology and soteriology. Vol. 17. Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press, 1995. (*)
Sayadaw, Mahasi. Manual of insight. Simon and Schuster, 2016. (*) Nanananda, Bhikkhu. Concept and Reality in Early
Buddhist Thought. Buddhist Publication Society, 2012. (*) Hurlburt, Russell T. Investigating pristine inner experience:
Moments of truth. Cambridge University Press, 2011. (*) Mangan, Bruce. "Sensation's Ghost." Psyche 7 (2001): 18. (*)
Langford, Michael. "The Most Direct and Rapid Means to Eternal Bliss." (2007). (*) Duží, Marie, Bjorn Jespersen, and
Pavel Materna. Procedural semantics for hyperintensional logic: foundations and applications of transparent intensional
logic. Vol. 17. Springer Science & Business Media, 2010. (*) Naming and Necessity Kripke (*) Reference and Existence
Kripke (*) General Semantics Korzybski Hayakawa (*) Philosophical Investigations Wittgenstein (*) Meditation for the
Love of It Kempton (*) https://vividness.live/2015/11/27/emptiness-form-and-dzogchen-ethics/ last accessed: 20200413 (*)
Maté, Gabor. Scattered minds: The origins and healing of attention deficit disorder. Vintage Canada, 2011. (*) Bollas,
Christopher. The shadow of the object: Psychoanalysis of the unthought known. Columbia University Press, 1987. (*)
Bollas, Christopher, and Sacha Bollas. Catch them before they fall: The psychoanalysis of breakdown. Vol. 978. No.
0-63726. Routledge, 2012. (*) Sidman, Murray. Coercion and its fallout. Boston: Authors Cooperative, 1989. (*) Walker,
Pete. Complex PTSD: From surviving to thriving: A guide and map for recovering from childhood trauma. Createspace
Independent Pub, 2013. (*) Ratcliffe, Matthew. Experiences of depression: A study in phenomenology. OUP Oxford, 2014.
(*) Sarasvathy, Saras D. Effectuation: Elements of entrepreneurial expertise. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2009. (*) Bohm,
David. On dialogue. Routledge, 2013. (*) Johnson-Laird, Philip Nicholas. Mental models: Towards a cognitive science of
language, inference, and consciousness. No. 6. Harvard University Press, 1983. (*) Churchland, Paul M. Plato's camera:
How the physical brain captures a landscape of abstract universals. MIT press, 2012. (*) Anderson, Michael L. After
phrenology: Neural reuse and the interactive brain. MIT Press, 2014. (*) Simon, Herbert A. "Bounded rationality."
Utility and probability. Palgrave Macmillan, London, 1990. 15-18. (*) Pettit, John W. Mipham's beacon of certainty:
illuminating the view of Dzogchen, the Great Perfection. Vol. 2. Simon and Schuster, 1999. (*) Kim, Hee-Jin. Dogen on
Meditation and Thinking: a Reflection on his View of Zen. SUNY Press, 2007. (*) Deacon, Terrence William. The symbolic
species: The co-evolution of language and the brain. No. 202. WW Norton & Company, 1998. (*) Tomasello, Michael.
Constructing a language. Harvard university press, 2009. (*) https://greg-goode.com/article/logic-and-the-direct-path/
(last accessed: 2020-08-31) (*) https://greg-goode.com/spirituality/the-nature-of-thought-1939-a-personal-review/ (last
accessed: 2020-08-31) (*) Blanshard, Brand. Reason and analysis (vols. 1 and 2). Routledge, 2014. (*) Fricker, Miranda.
Epistemic injustice: Power and the ethics of knowing. Oxford University Press, 2007. (*)
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enactivism (Last accessed: 2020-08-31) (*) Suarez, Hume, Descartes, Leibniz, Aristotle,
Plato, Kant, Popper, Deutsch, Gendlin, Kripke, Wittgenstein (*) Clarke DD, Schubiner H, Clark-Smith MA, Abbass A, (2019)
Psychophysiologic Disorders, Trauma informed, Interprofessional diagnosis and treatment, U.S. (*) practice on perceptual
forms herbert demmin (*) Drescher, Gary L. Good and real: Demystifying paradoxes from physics to ethics. MIT
Press, 2006. (*) Ryle, Gilbert. The concept of mind. Routledge, 2009. (*) Mitchell, Stephen. Tao te ching. (*) Deacon,
Terrence W. Incomplete nature: How mind emerged from matter. WW Norton & Company, 2011. (*) Denton, Derek. The
primordial emotions: The dawning of consciousness. Oxford University Press, 2005. (*) Morsella, Ezequiel. "The function
of phenomenal states: supramodular interaction theory." Psychological Review 112.4 (2005): 1000. (*) Metzinger, Thomas.
Being no one: The self-model theory of subjectivity. MIT Press, 2004. (*) Sorensen, Roy A. Thought experiments. Oxford
University Press on Demand, 1998. (*) Bader, Michael J. Arousal: The secret logic of sexual fantasies. Macmillan, 2003.
(*) Casati, Roberto, and Achille C. Varzi. "Holes and other superficialities." (1994). (*) Rosen, Robert. Life itself: a
comprehensive inquiry into the nature, origin, and fabrication of life. Columbia University Press, 1991. (*)
Johnson-Laird, Philip Nicholas. Mental models: Towards a cognitive science of language, inference, and consciousness.
No. 6. Harvard University Press, 1983. (*) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Grossberg (*)
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judea_Pearl (*) Pearl, Judea. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009. (*) Jaynes,
Edwin T. Probability theory: The logic of science. Cambridge university press, 2003. (*)
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_J._Friston (*) Smith, Brian Cantwell. "On the Origin of Objects. A Bradford Book."
(1996). (*) Feinstein, Alvan R. "Clinical judgment." (1967). (*) Hurlburt, Russell T., and Sarah A. Akhter.
"Unsymbolized thinking." Consciousness and Cognition 17.4 (2008): 1364-1374. (*) Leonard, George. Mastery: The keys to
success and long-term fulfillment. Penguin, 1992. (*) Kramer, Joel, and Diana Alstad. The guru papers: Masks of
authoritarian power. North Atlantic Books, 2012. (*) Kent, William. Data and Reality: A Timeless Perspective on
Perceiving and Managing Information. Technics publications, 2012. (*) Van den Bergh, Omer, et al. "Better safe than
sorry: A common signature of general vulnerability for psychopathology." (2020).
